---
layout: post
title: McHenry County ramble.
---

{% flickr_photo 20244158488 'Medium 800' %}

Yesterday we caught the first UP-NW northbound to Harvard at 8:48 AM
at Jefferson Park--a run I've begun calling the Rando Express due to
the proliferation of shiny fenders and boxy front bags on this first
train of the weekend to the ferticle cycling-grounds of rural
north-central Illinois. On this ride we shared a car with a pair of
Madison-bound cyclists and admired the [Swift Ozette
bag](https://www.builtbyswift.com/products/5) one of them carried on a
nice old rando'd-out Fuji Berkeley. After an abortive bike-camping
attempt out of Harvard a few weeks back I'd been in a cycling funk;
but M-- had wanted to take her nice Trek out on some country roads and
had found a route east from Harvard to [Glacial
Park](http://www.mccdistrict.org/rccms/index.php/glacial-park/)--and
so here we were.

My own rando bike was indisposed, so I'd brought my fixed-gear--not
without trepidation. For boring reasons, I'd never ridden this bike,
or indeed any fixed-gear bike, for more than a mile or so. I'd also
never ridden clipless before--but I'd put a set of hand-me-down SPD
pedals on the bike (heeding dire Internet warnings about the folly of
fixed-gears without foot retention) and had just gotten SPD shoes the
day before, the sum total of my clipless experience being a few runs
up and down the alley behind our house and then a quick loop a few
blocks in length.

But I was bound and determined to have a nice ride. And we
did. Fortified by doughnuts (buttermilk for me, maple-glazed for M--)
and egg-and-bacon sandwiches at [Harvard
Donut](http://www.yelp.com/biz/harvard-doughnut-harvard), which were
both excellent and cheap, we set out for our turnaround point, the
Grand Old Mill restaurant in Wonder Lake (chosen largely for its
name).

As it turned out the bike was fine, the fixed-gear setup was fine, the
pedals were fine, and even the brand-new shoes were fine. We were out
of Harvard on country roads almost before we knew it and M--'s route
was lovely, with plenty of barns, horses, cows, and even some nice
little hills (by Illinois standards).

We were dismayed to discover that the Grand Old Mill doesn't open
until dinner on Saturdays; but there is a nice country store across
the street where we bought some pickles and beef jerky and sat out
front and chatted with a charity rider (we'd been seeing groups of riders heading the other direction most of our ride) on a lovely blue-and-yellow LeMond Zurich. (It turned out they were raising money for for a
[school in Uganda](http://www.pim-africa.org/event/bike-to-the-lake/),
where my sister has lived and worked for several years.)

We decided that we'd have a better chance of catching the early return
train in Crystal Lake--which was a bit closer and where the train
would be arriving a little later than in Harvard--so we hopped onto
the Prairie Trail and made it into town with an hour to spare, enough
time to enjoy some very nice beers at the [Crystal Lake
Brewing](http://crystallakebrew.com/) taproom before we headed for
home.