---
layout: post
title: Ex-Outpace.
---

<p>
  <figure>
    {% flickr_photo 16870937730 "Medium 640" %}
    <figcaption>Core Offer Engine team stickers featuring our Trello icons, designed by <a href="http://blog.jessitron.com">Jessica Kerr</a></figcaption>
  </figure>
</p>

On Thursday Outpace Systems laid off two-thirds of its development
team (including me). It was a sad day for me, because the engineering
culture at Outpace was really something special, and I'll miss it.

What made Outpace unique was the full-time remote pairing. What made
it work was the incredible quality of the team. Although I'd been
working remotely for more than five years when I was hired, I'd done
only occasional pairing. I was used to working primarily on my own and
I viewed full-time pairing with some trepidation. I figured I'd either
love it or hate it.

Happily, I ended up loving it--and I believe that's mostly due to my
colleagues (both within the small Core Offer Engine team and across
Outpace generally). They were all excellent developers, but they were
also great people who were a pleasure to work with. Their diversity of
background and experience meant that every day I learned something
new, and their commitment to software quality was a revelation in an
industry that tends to value speed over understanding. It was an
environment that made me feel like I could do work at a higher level
than I'd thought possible.

Outpace put the lie to the idea that distributed teams don't build
community. Though we only met up in person once or twice a year (and I
had a number of coworkers whom I never met at all), between
[Slack](https://slack.com/), pairing, weekly "Learn You a Thing" talks
on topics from [test.check](https://github.com/clojure/test.check) to
[Pixie](https://github.com/pixie-lang/pixie), and our daily
"stand-down" (an informal end-of-day [Zoom](http://zoom.us) chat), I
felt more connected to my team than I've ever felt working in an
office. Within hours of the layoffs, people had started a new Slack
team and a Google group to keep in touch and were gathering in Zoom to
say their goodbyes (sadly, this all happened while I was on vacation
and traveling without access to a computer, so I missed the Zooms, but
a colleague who was there called it the "best layoff ever").

If you're looking for great, thoughtful, well-rounded Clojure
developers, you have an embarrassment of riches at the moment. Another
colleague said a few weeks ago that there were no duds or mis-hires at
Outpace, and she was right. I was lucky to work with these people, and
you'd be lucky to hire any of them.