---
layout: post
title: Acorn medium saddlebag long-term review.
---

{% rokka_photo 838700 "IMG_1986" %}

A few weeks ago, while I was at a movie, some reprobate stole off of
my trusty vintage Centurion city bike my seatpost, saddle (a
nicely-worn-in Brooks B17), and worst of all, my beloved
[Acorn medium saddlebag](http://www.acornbags.com/products/medium-saddlebag).

[Acorn](http://acornbags.com/) bags probably better-known by
reputation than by direct experience, since it is a bit of a pain to
actually buy one. These bags are made one at a time by a couple in
California; they are sold in batches, released once a month or so on a
date which is not announced ahead of time. You've got to sign up to be
notified and then check your email aggressively, since popular styles
will sell out in minutes. And each batch is made in one color only, so
if you have a preference, you might have to wait a while.

While I generally have little patience for this kind of thing, I'll
jump through these hoops for Acorn bags because--on the strength of my
now-gone medium saddlebag--I think these are some of the nicest bike
bags of the cotton-and-leather variety you can buy today. The
consistency and refinement of the stitching and cutting is beyond
anything else I've seen, with all seams neatly taped. The
materials--Martexin waxed twill[^1] and Hermann Oak vegetable-tanned
bridle leather--are best-in-class (and were in the process of aging
very nicely on my saddlebag).

But even more than the quality, the thoughtful design of the bag stood
out. The wedge-shaped medium saddlebag, specifically, fills a niche
between small tools-and-tube seat bags and massive, transverse
Carradice-style bags. It was perfect for everyday use in the city; I
could carry tools with enough room left over for a Kindle and maybe a
few small items from the corner store if I had to run an errand, all
in a neat and compact space. The inner nylon expandable collar lets
you overpack the bag while keeping your items secure, and everything
is designed so well that I found that items would generally stay in
the bag even if I forgot to fasten the closure.

Best of all, the two pairs of D-rings (in conjunction with Acorn's
[nylon lashing straps](http://www.acornbags.com/collections/accessories/products/nylon-lashing-strap-set))
allow you to strap surprisingly bulky loads onto this little bag. In
addition to the occasional impromptu growler run, I was able to
securely pack my (none-too-light) tent this way on numerous camping
trips, and heavy winter layers on shorter trips.

At nearly a pound, it's a heavy bag for its capacity (none of those
lovely durable materials are very light). And I'd prefer a tad less
taper--the "nose" of the bag is so narrow that not much fits there. I
might consider the new
[medium/large saddlebag](http://www.acornbags.com/collections/all/products/medium-large-saddlebag)
(not available at the time I ordered my saddlebag) for a little more
space (though I prefer the single closure of the smaller bag). But
these are minor shortcomings in an otherwise excellent bag which it
was a pleasure to use.

[^1]: Though it looks like they now use canvas (vs twill) for the
    black bags--mine, though black, was twill, which I prefer
    aesthetically.
