---
layout: post
title: Metra-cyclingâ€”Crystal Lake to Aurora.
---

{% flickr_photo 17880762132 'Medium 800' %}

I find myself more and more eager to get out of the city these days to
ride. And since there's only so many times you can head up Sheridan
Road, that has meant lots of Metra rides. Last week I rode
out-and-back north from the Crystal Lake station to Richmond near the
Wisconsin border along McHenry County's Prairie Trail. But while I was
waiting for the train home a local told me that next time I should
head south for more scenic riding. So yesterday I did, taking the
Prairie Trail to Algonquin and then the Fox River Trail down to
Aurora. It was also a chance to test my brand-new, locally-made rando
bag (in revolutionary red![^1]) from David Banzer of [Treetop
Bags](http://treetopbags.blogspot.com/)--which replaces an Ostrich bag
that self-destructed on last week's ride (its first).

{% flickr_photo 17697497839 'Medium 800' %}

But first I grabbed lunch at the Cafe Olympic just west of the Crystal
Lake Metra. The $10 Mediterranean chicken lunch special was vastly
more enjoyable than my eventual dinner at a self-styled "gastropub" in
Aurora at twice the price. I can't recommend this place enough.

{% flickr_photo 17261233894 'Medium 800' %}

Getting out of Crystal Lake was a little hairy due to construction
interrupting the trail, but once I was out of town it became very
nice, passing through conservation areas like Larsen Prairie (above).


{% flickr_photo 17263337813 'Medium 800' %}

Among the highlights of this route are the numerous river
crossings. It's interesting to see the character of the river and
surrounding development change as you head from the more rural
northern areas to the more developed suburbs to the south.

{% flickr_photo 17857424346 'Medium 800' %}

This painted turtle was trundling along the bike path. I moved him to
the side so that he wouldn't get crunched (having just read [an
account of a turtle
rescue by bicycle](http://chasingmailboxes.com/2015/05/12/deb-of-women-bikedc-part-1-bike-infrastructure-beyond-d-c-and-turtle-rescues/)
which stressed turtles' visual orientation, I took care to keep him
pointed in the same direction).

{% flickr_photo 17884307281 'Medium 800' %}

As you come into Elgin you pass by [Pratt
Castle](http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1998-08-11/news/9808110142_1_castle-site-four-story-tower-homemade-armor),
the work of a local eccentric obsessed with the Middle Ages, now grown
even more authentic as it has fallen into disrepair. (Will it surprise
anyone to learn that the builder was an electrical engineer? I suspect
it will not.)

{% flickr_photo 17263346523 'Medium 800' %}

In downtown Elgin you can take a path out to two man-made islands in
the river, from which there are nice views of the city. If you look
closely, you'll see the sign that says that the Fox River Trail
continues up at street level (I believe you're supposed to take a
right onto the pictured bridge.) I foolishly ignored this sign, went
under the bridge, and ended up on a spur of the Illinois Prairie
Path. Normally this wouldn't have been a problem, since there is a
connector back onto the Fox River Trail a bit south of here, but it's
closed for construction through November, so I had to backtrack a bit
into South Elgin and cross the river on State Street.

{% flickr_photo 17696218930 'Medium 800' %}

The Fox River Trail, for much of its length, is actually two trails,
one on either side of the river, and beneath many of the (car) bridges
which span it are separate pedestrian/bike bridges (like this one)
connecting them. This is much more pleasant than the usual approach of
sticking a bike lane (if even that) along the side of a busy and
heavily-trafficked bridge.

{% flickr_photo 17857445816 'Medium 800' %}

In Batavia I was delighted to come across this
[woonerf](http://chi.streetsblog.org/2014/06/30/a-woonerf-in-the-west-suburbs-offers-a-sneak-peek-at-argyle-shared-street/),
which I'd read about in Streetsblog but had forgotten was on my
route. Chicago is planning a similar treatment--in which pedestrians,
cyclists, and drivers all share the same space--for a few blocks of
Argyle Street near my apartment, so it was interesting to see this in
action. (Though as you can see from my picture, there wasn't much
pedestrian activity when I was there. Argyle is much livelier and
perhaps better suited for this street style.)

{% flickr_photo 17883784095 'Medium 800' %}

On the way out of Batavia I ran into several families of geese who'd
decided to settle on the trail, the parents hissing at me in defense
of their goslings as I passed by. If I were a gosling, I think I'd
prefer the nice soft grass adjacent to the trail--but what do I know.

I arrived in Aurora a bit too late for the 6:20 train and, since the
next wasn't until 8:20 and I was famished, grabbed a beer and dinner
at the [Two Brothers
Roundhouse](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two_Brothers_Roundhouse)
brewpub at the Metra station. (Of course, I had to choose the Prairie
Path Ale.) Thus fortified I boarded the train and settled in with
[_The Wizard and the Volcano_](http://www.decastories.com/wizard/)
from the always-excellent Deca journalists' cooperative. I was home
before I knew it.

[^1]: I cannot prove with scientific rigor that this bag, in the color of class struggle, is responsible for my belting out old union hymns as I pedaled through the Fox River Valley. Perhaps my ersatz-French bike played a role, or the ghosts of the [Radium Girls of Ottawa, Illinois](http://capitolfax.com/2011/09/04/the-ap-whitewashes-history/). But I think the bag helped.