---
layout: post
title: Cetma 7-rail rack long-term review.
---

{% rokka_photo 8eaea2 "DSC01798" %}

It's been a year and a half since I found this wonderful porteur rack
(on Craigslist, for a song), and the only thing wrong with it is that
Cetma (which is a guy named Lane Kagay in California) doesn't make
them anymore.

He now sells a <a
href="http://cetmacargo.com/products/5-rail-cetma-rack">5-rail
version</a>, with a platform 11&Prime; square (versus 11&Prime; &times; 17&Prime; on my
7-rail). The 5-rail is probably just as useful as the 7-rail for most
of the things you'd want to use a front rack for. I'm sure it's a bit
lighter (the 7-rail, if I'm remembering correctly, weighs something
north of four pounds, not far off the weight of a decent steel bike
frame). And he's made much-needed improvements to the connection
between the support struts and the platform. But what I love in the
7-rail is how delightfully excessive it is. It is the Humvee of bike
racks. There are dedicated cargo bikes with less capacity than my bike
has with this rack.

I've carried firewood:

{% rokka_photo 74e328 "DSC01658" %}

Camping gear:

{% rokka_photo 4e1586 "DSC01622" %}

Last year's Christmas tree (this year, we live closer to <a
href="http://www.gethsemanegardens.com/">Gethsemane</a> and it was
easier just to walk):

{% rokka_photo b9881c "DSC01052" %}

And plenty of groceries, take-out, parcels, and so on. I've become one
of those people who delight in carrying things on their bike that
other people might reasonably assume are unsuitable. The other day at
the <a href="http://www.chicagoforchuy.com/index.html">Jesus "Chuy"
Garcia for Mayor</a> field office M&mdash; began to decline a
staffer's offer of a large yard sign[^1], since we'd ridden our
bikes. But of course it fit perfectly on the Cetma rack, held securely
by <a
href="http://www.rei.com/product/833518/coghlans-arno-straps">Arno
straps</a>, and in fact the stakes protruding forward lent the bike a
pleasantly insectile affect which kept passing drivers at a slightly
greater remove than usual.

I'm fully sold on the porteur rack concept for city riding and I don't
imagine I'll ever want to deal with a rear rack again. The cargo
capacity is better, and, on the right bike, the handling is much
better too (I think I prefer the handling of my city bike&mdash;built
up from a 1970s Centurion frame, model unknown&mdash;with the rack
loaded to its unloaded handling, although I'm sure its designers never
anticipated that it would be subject to such abuse).

There are a couple of minor drawbacks to this rack:

- The weight, mentioned above. Cetma doesn't publish a weight for its
  5-rail rack, but I've heard the newer racks are in general lighter
  than the older ones.

- The generic Wald handlebar brackets are effective, but finicky to
  install. Cetma now ships a different style of brackets with its new
  racks.

- The support struts attach to the rack rails with p-clamps. In
  theory, this means that the attachment point along the rails is
  infinitely adjustable for a perfectly horizontal rack. In practice,
  these clamps slip when the rack is loaded, making it difficult on my
  bike to keep the rack elevated away from the top of the
  fender. Cetma's current racks use a "fin" underneath the rack rail
  with regularly-spaced holes, to which you bolt the support
  struts&mdash;this seems like a better approach.

- The lower ends of the support struts fit over the quick-release
  axle. This is a clever solution that doesn't require any special
  eyelets. On the other hand, it means that every time you need to
  release the front wheel, the rack comes loose, and it can be tricky
  to fit both the dropouts and the support strut ends into place on
  the axle, especially when the rack is heavily loaded, which can make
  fixing a flat more of a hassle than it needs to be. It would be nice
  to be able to use your fork eyelets as an option if you've got them.

But overall it's fantastic: well-made and well-thought-out. My bike
would be a far less versatile machine without this superior rack.

[^1]: Yeah, yeah: "Yard signs don't vote." We canvassed too.
