---
title: Ride Report&#58; Fox Valley Permanent.
layout: post
---

<!-- {% flickr_photo 18386949240 'Medium 800' %} -->
{% flickr_photo 17953925403 'Medium 800' %}

> Alarm clocks, like automobiles, are mechanical devices which bring me no pleasure and thus I do what I can to avoid them in my daily existence. -- [_Kent Peterson_](http://kentsbike.blogspot.com/2008/10/philosophy-of-adventure.html)

I share Kent Peterson's opinion of alarm clocks but not his ability to
wake myself in the small hours, so it was to the dissonant squawk of
my phone's alarm that I awoke yesterday at 4:30--a time which would
let me eat a decent breakfast before riding downtown to catch the
first train to Naperville, the start (and end) of the [Fox Valley
Permanent](https://sites.google.com/site/ottawapermanent/).

For the past few months I've been riding a randonneuring bike,
complete with fancy Honjo fenders, front rack/decaleur/[rando
bag](http://treetop.bigcartel.com/product/tall-rando-bag-red-waxed-canvas),
and a motley assortment of ancient French parts of which I am totally
unworthy--and I've felt like a bit of a fraud, since I'd done no
randonneuring whatsoever. I'd hoped to ride some of the [Great Lakes
Randonneurs' brevet series](http://www.glrrando.org/brevetseries.html)
this year, but between the lingering winter weather and an unexpected
job search, I didn't end up spending much time on the bike until the
series was mostly over. Having done shorter local rides in the company
of GLR randonneurs in the past, it was clear to me that I was in no
shape to keep up. A permanent, unlike a brevet, is generally ridden
solo, and I figured that if I failed, I'd have done so less
publicly. So a couple weeks ago I mailed in my registration to ride
the route on Saturday the 6th of June--a date which at the time seemed
comfortably distant but which subsequently began to approach with
alarming speed.

To make a long story short, I did manage to complete the ride (in 11
hours and 45 minutes), and I only walked up one hill.[^1] Outbound from
Naperville to Ottawa the route was especially lovely through Fermilab
and around Plano (an Amtrak-and-cycling weekend in Plano with M-- is
now on the calendar).

Going into the ride I knew that I wasn't in optimal shape for this
distance (my previous longest ride this year was around 60 miles), but
I hoped that I was close enough to make it through, and that is more
or less how it worked out. I felt very good until a few miles before
Ottawa, where it turned into a bit of a slog along a lengthy,
ruler-straight farm road with nothing to see but miles and miles of
corn. In Ottawa I ate a sandwich and felt better, but there was a bit
of a headwind coming back (which my body informs me was surely much
stronger than the National Weather Service's records indicate that it
must have been) and it was a struggle to maintain much speed in the
second half. (Unfortunately I managed to reset my bike computer while
loading my bike onto the Metra home, so I never saw my rolling
average, though perhaps that's for the best.)

<figure>
{% flickr_photo 18548212996 'Medium 800' %}
<figcaption>Outside the last control in Yorkville.</figcaption>
</figure>

While I have some training and bike setup work to do before I attempt
another ride like this, I'm glad I gave it a shot and proved to myself
that I can survive this distance. I'm eager to attempt the GLR brevets
next spring and I'm much more confident now about some of the more
ambitious bike-camping trips I've been contemplating for this summer.

Thank you to route owner Eric Peterson for putting together a great
route (with a reliable cue sheet) and one that starts less than a mile
from a Metra station.

[^1]: This was after I managed to throw my chain trying to shift into my bailout gear, which I chose to take as a sign of the futility of the effort.