---
layout: post
title: Touring the Catskills with 718 Cyclery.
---

_This post is now several months old because I've been both busy and
lazy, but I'm posting it belatedly as I try to work through my backlog
of subject matter._

When I signed up for [718 Cyclery](http://www.718c.com/)'s annual
Catskills tour we hadn't nailed down a date for our move from Newburgh
to Queens--in the event, I left on our third day in the new apartment,
leaving a very understanding M-- alone with piles of boxes.

## Day 1

{% rokka_photo 067cce "IMG_4707" %}

I met up with the group on the Upper West Side on an unseasonably warm
Tuesday morning.  At six days this would be the longest tour I'd done,
and I wasn't sure I'd packed enough clothing. I really started to worry when
the other riders were visibly surprised by how lightly I'd packed.
After a quick breakfast in Washington Heights we continued across the
bridge toward the Palisades and eventually to Beaver Pond Campground
in Harriman State Park. The last couple miles were gruelingly uphill
on Willow Grove Road; fortunately we'd stopped for ice cream at the
bottom.

## Day 2

{% rokka_photo d34c74 "IMG_4711" %}

Rolling out of Beaver Pond, we took a gorgeous, swoopy detour along
Seven Lakes and Arden Valley Roads to visit a small mountain lake,
where the leaves were just beginning to change. Duly refreshed, we
headed north through Goshen toward the day's destination: Sam Pryor
Campground at Minnewaska State Park, and no less importantly, the
famous [Mountain Brauhaus](http://www.mountainbrauhaus.com/). Many of
these roads through western Orange County were familiar to me, since
we were only a bit west of Newburgh, and I proposed bypassing the
unpaved (and often very muddy and overgrown) Walkill-to-Gardiner
segment of the Walkill Valley Rail Trail on (what I remembered as)
nice low-key gravel farm roads. When we got there, however, it turned
out that those roads were in fact on the grounds of the Shawangunk
prison and not open to the public (I'd previously accessed them
through through intersections with the rail trail where no signs were
posted), so we ended up on Sand Hill Road instead--which itself had
some nice views of the ridge we'd be crossing the following day.

{% rokka_photo 86ca0d "IMG_4718" %}

We rolled out of Gardiner at the golden hour, reaching the campground
with just enough time to get set up and take a shower before heading
to the Brauhaus, where I gorged on veal schnitzel.

M-- and I had often discussed camping at Sam Pryor during our time in
Newburgh (it was only about 20 miles from our house there). I'd been a
bit sad that we'd never made it, until this trip. The
campground--which is run for New York State by the American Alpine
Club--is clearly intended for climbers, and only climbers. Although
the campground is nearly brand-new and the buildings are quite nice,
I've never been to so off-putting a campground. The sites are tiny and
crowded together. The showers cost $3 for 4 minutes, take only
quarters, and there are no change machines within many miles (luckily
we knew this in advance and came prepared). No fires are allowed,
except at the "communal" firepit, which is right next to a massive
concrete slab lit up with klieg lights that stay on until 9:47 pm (the
specificity of this time is not elaborated upon by the printer-paper
sign announcing the policy).

## Day 3

{% rokka_photo 8a9836 "IMG_4739" %}

A campground that does not inspire one to linger facilitates an early
start. At any rate, we needed one to meet Joe (718 Cyclery's owner) at
the inexplicably-named Mountain Harbor Deli for excellent breakfast
sandwiches, after which he planned to chronicle our suffering on the
climb over the Shawangunk Ridge--with a drone. (In fact, it wasn't
that bad; I've now crossed the Gunks via State Route 52 near
Ellenville, via Ferguson Road near Roosa Gap State Forest, and via
Mamakating Road out of Wurtsboro, and this climb along US 44/NY 55
felt like the easiest of the bunch, though I don't know how the grades
compare.) He managed to get [a little
footage](https://www.instagram.com/p/BZBtTDJHWN6/?taken-by=718_cyclery),
but a light rain and heavy mist limited visibility.

{% rokka_photo 4b9897 "IMG_4727" %}

Pretty quickly we left the highway on the old carriage road which
leads to Awosting Falls, where we took a short break. After returning
to the pavement, we began an exhilirating descent which eventually put
us in Napanoch. As far as any of us could tell, the only things in
Napanoch are the Eastern and Ulster Correctional Facilities and a
Walmart Supercenter--our destination, as it was the only place to buy
dinner supplies on the way to the night's destination, the Peekamoose
campground at [Sundown Wild
Forest](http://www.dec.ny.gov/lands/75346.html).

A steep climb out of Napanoch let us out on 55 a bit east of the
Rondout Reservoir--familiar to me from my [Peekamoose
overnight](/peekamoose/) last summer--which we soon passed.

{% rokka_photo 71a9c9 "IMG_4745" %}

During a food stop at the Grahamsville Deli, we got the first
of the rain that would follow us the rest of our trip. We spent a
while hoping to wait it out before giving in and heading off for
Peekamoose in the rain. It would continue to rain throughout the
night, turning our campsites into a muddy mess. Fortunately we'd
picked up a bundle of firewood in Grahamsville and then a bit more in
Sundown (where the bait-and-camp-store was unexpectedly open even
though it was mid-week after Labor Day), so we had a fire at one of the more sheltered campsites.

{% rokka_photo a00938 "IMG_4755" %}

## Day 4

{% rokka_photo 5512d9 "IMG_4757" %}

Friday was, for me, the most difficult day of the tour. It dawned
bright and clear, and I was hoping for the sunny weather to hold so
that I'd be able to dry my tent and clothes. We got a late start, but
no one worried much--this was supposed to be the lowest-mileage
day. We rode back through Sundown, and at the intersection of Sundown
Road and NY 55A, we took a left onto 55A, passing the reservoir again
in the opposite direction from the day before. I didn't bother to
check the cue sheets I'd printed out, since some of the other riders
had GPS units, but this turned out to be the wrong turn. Fortunately,
we discovered this before descending into Ellenville, but it added
15-20 miles to our ride, and by the time we made it back to the
intersection to rejoin the planned route, it was nearly 1pm.

A few minutes later, it began to rain. Once again, we sheltered for a
bit at the Grahamsville Deli, waiting for the rain to pass, and it did
lighten after a bit. We had a couple hours' respite--though it
remained far too misty and overcast for anything to dry--before the
rain came back in earnest during our second and last food stop.

Wet and (at least in my case) a bit demoralized, we rolled on. (None
of us had had any cell service to speak of since Napanoch or so, so we
had no way of knowing how long the rain was forecast to last.) Eventually the rain
stopped again; while we and our gear were all soaked, at least we
wouldn't be camping in a downpour a second night. We passed through
Livingston Manor as it became increasingly clear that we weren't going
to make our campsite (at [Little Pond
Campground](http://www.dec.ny.gov/outdoor/24478.html)) before
sunset--so much for our short day! But the dusk gave me a chance to
try out my new [Edelux II
headlight](https://www.compasscycle.com/shop/components/lights/son-edelux-ii-generator-headlight-hanging/)/[Velogical
rim
dynamo](http://www.velogical-engineering.com/velogical-rim-dynamo---standard-bicycle-dynamo---smooth-running.-lightweight-efficient)
combination in earnest on the really lovely roads leading to the
campground. And at one point in the last few miles, a small black bear
crossed our path only a dozen yards ahead! It was a sight to wake up
the tiredest rider and good motivation for the grueling final climb up
the campground access road.  We set up camp in the dark (making doubly
sure to hang all of our food) and feasted on barbecue heated up over
the fire.

## Day 5

{% rokka_photo 546924 "IMG_4765" %}

A few months earlier I'd visited Little Pond Campground with M--,
driving up and riding back to Newburgh. Today we headed out in the
opposite direction, deeper into the Catskills on the steep and scenic
Barkaboom Road, then east along [Pepacton
Reservoir](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pepacton_Reservoir) toward
the next night's stop, [Kenneth Wilson
Campground](http://www.dec.ny.gov/outdoor/24472.html) near the Slide
Mountain Wilderness. We had mostly beautiful weather, interrupted by a
heavy downpour at mid-morning which had me worried about camping in
the rain again--but this time it lasted only a few minutes.

We enjoyed a meal at the famous [Phoenicia
Diner](http://phoeniciadiner.com/) and then rolled into camp. Only a
single campsite had been reserved, the rangers wouldn't let all
of us share it, and no other campsites were available, so we had a
scary moment when we thought we'd have to find another campground
(something my legs didn't really have in them)--but fortunately we
were able to get a second site in the end. (I later saw that the site
next to mine had five cars, five massive family-size tents, and a
dozen or more people--but as always, the rangers seem to delight in
applying one rule to drivers and another to cyclists.)

## Day 6

On the last day the group was heading to Poughkeepsie to take the
train back to the city, but I had to head to Newburgh to help M--. She
was meeting a staffer from the [Hudson River Maritime
Museum](http://www.hrmm.org/), who was driving down to pick up the
little wooden catboat that we'd decided to donate when we moved to the
city. I said goodbye to the others and headed out early, arriving at
our old Newburgh house with just enough time to shower and change. It
was sad to see our boat go, but I knew it would be in good hands at
the museum, where they run a wooden boatbuilding school which has
handled the recent restorations of the Hudson River sloop _Clearwater_
as well as the Beacon Sloop Club's _Woody Guthrie_. Afterward I
loaded my hard-used bike into the back of M--'s car and we headed back
home to Queens.
