---
layout: post
title: Ride Report&#58; Ronkonkoma 200k.
---

{% rokka_photo 690dcdfec4508091654d165affd720fef43ccf51 "Aboard the South Ferry to Shelter Island" %}

After [my last 200k ride](/keep-the-river-on-your-right), I swore I'd
never do something so stupid again, and then a couple days later I
signed up for the [Long Island Randonneurs' Ronkonkoma
200k](https://www.lirando.org/randonneurs_permanents/#200k). This was
my first true mass-start brevet (I'm not counting April's
[populaire](/jones-beach-populaire/)) and my third ride of this length.

The field was quite large (I believe over 40 riders; RBA Steve Yesko
said this was the most they'd ever had) and included many first-time
randonneurs. There were large contingents from both the [New York
Cycle Club](https://nycc.org/) and the [Five Borough Bicycle
Club](http://5bbc.org/), somewhat overwhelming the bike inspectors at
the start--we ended up starting a few minutes late.[^1]

I was determined to significantly beat my previous 200k time and to
finish in under 11 hours. Since I'm no faster than I was two weeks
ago, I planned to do this by taking fewer and shorter stops. (On that
last ride, for example, we'd eaten a sit-down lunch at a diner.)

Pretty quickly after the start of the ride I found myself following
some club cyclists--5BBC, I think. Never having done any real paceline
riding I always worry about the etiquette in these situations, and I'm
not sure they were happy to have me on their wheels, but they didn't
seem to rotate much so I never got a chance to take a pull in
front. After riding together for an hour or so, they stopped at a gas
station; I was feeling good so I kept going.

In fact, I was feeling so good that when a group of three riders began
to pass me, I held on against my better judgement. They were much
stronger than me, and pushing myself to match their pace was
surprisingly fun, but it became clear that I couldn't maintain it for
long. After a few miles I dropped off. I don't know if that short
stretch of fast riding wore out my legs or if I'd simply reached the
point where I was no longer fresh, but I never felt as strong after
this point.

Around mile 53 I reached the second control at Goldberg's Deli in
Wainscott. I lost a little time overshooting the control and then
trying to find the entrance, so I was more set than ever on getting in
and out quickly. I filled my water bottles and bought some snacks and
an (excellent) bacon-and-egg sandwich, which I ate as I rode.

The best things about this route were its two ferry crossings, and I
reached the first, the South Ferry from North Haven to Shelter Island,
about ten miles out of the deli. Though brief, the ferry ride was a
nice chance to rest and enjoy the views of Peconic and Gardiners
Bays. For the most part, I found the Hamptons unappealing: the massive
houses and expensive cars of the ultra-rich and the way the shoreline
is always walled off behind gates and hedges are offensive to me. But
from the ferry I could see how this lovely this coastal landscape must
have been before all of that.

A few miles later (including a few bonus miles after I missed a turn),
I boarded the North Ferry from Shelter Island to Greenport--this time
in the company of several other randonneurs, including one on a
fixed-gear pushing a huge gear. But they took a break at the Greenport
ferry landing, so I rode on alone.

I rode most of this leg--from the ferry at mile 67 to the control at
mile 95--alone, stopping once to buy water, and again to fix a flat
(with two flats on my last ride and one on this one, I think it's time
to replace my tires). Near the end, though, I caught up with a couple
on matching Canyon bikes, and we reached the control (a gas station)
together. I spent a little longer here than I had at the deli; the RBA
had slices of watermelon (delicious!), salty snacks, ice, and
water. At this control I met Charlie, who was riding this brevet for
the fourth time; before heading out he warned me that the hills were
all ahead of us, in this last 35-mile stretch.

I rode out with the same couple I'd arrived with, but they quickly
left me behind when the climbing started. I'm not much of a climber on
my best day, and with a hundred miles in my legs I'm useless. On one
of the hills I caught up with Charlie; we were both hurting, and we
ended up riding (and, in a few spots, walking) together the rest of
the way. There was one more info control at mile 117, where we allowed
ourselves five minutes to rest; from there it was mercifully flat back
to the Ronkonkoma train station.

Despite nearly an hour and a half of stopped time (according to
RideWithGPS), I shaved 59 minutes off my previous time, and met my
goal of finishing in under 11 hours. I'm not sure if I'll do one of
these again, or if I want to focus so much on my time if I do; that
focus meant I spent more time riding alone and missed out on some of
the camaraderie for which randonneurs are renowned.[^2] But I enjoyed
doing this one, and hey, now I can say I've seen the [Big
Duck](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Duck).

([route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/27744214))

[^1]: The organizers allowed us to adjust our times for the later start; I received my brevet card at 8:15 instead of the planned 8:00 start, so those fifteen minutes were credited to my time.

[^2]: Well, that and the fact that most of the roads were too busy to ride two abreast.