---
title: Winter solstice bike overnight.
layout: post
---

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 2af3a989dca42c58ac3a0f1064943d96acf174fa "Ferncliff Forest observation tower" %}
  <figcaption>Ferncliff Forest observation tower</figcaption>
</figure>

Since a snowy trip to Vernooy Falls last month, I'd been looking
forward to [NYC Adventure Cycling's last trip of the
year](https://www.meetup.com/NYC-Adventure-Cycling-Club/events/256014417/),
to Harriman. But last Saturday morning, when I rode out to meet the
group, the weather was nastier than predicted--cold, steady rain, with
colder and heavier rain predicted. This is my least favorite weather
for camping, and I wasn't really dressed to stay dry on the bike
either. So I bailed before I'd made it ten blocks.

I was determined to get one more trip in before the end of the year,
and this past weekend was my last shot. There was heavy rain Thursday
and Friday, but the weekend looked clear, so I made plans for a short
solo trip to [Ferncliff Forest](https://www.ferncliffforest.org/).

## Saturday

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 401149be5f62f5c8a8776147c76a6a8508654c0a "Kilns from the old ironworks in Wassaic" %}
  <figcaption>Kilns from the old ironworks in Wassaic</figcaption>
</figure>

A long train ride to the start in Wassaic--the end of the Metro-North
Harlem line, in far eastern Dutchess County a few miles from the
Connecticut border--meant that, on the day after the winter solstice,
I didn't have a lot of daylight to work with. So my planned route was
a short one, only thirty miles.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo ebbce84c7d6acf37dfb8fe1d6210cc25edb88da0 "Inside one of the kilns" %}
  <figcaption>Inside one of the kilns</figcaption>
</figure>

Although in my time living in Newburgh I'd ridden quite a bit in the
southwestern part of Dutchess County around Beacon, and although my
family has a long history in the county (on both sides) and I grew up
visiting the area, this part of it was largely new to me. I was
pleased to discover how lovely these roads were. Many were dirt--a bit
muddy after the rain of the preceding few days, and thus slower
going--but I wasn't in a hurry, and they were nearly traffic-free.

{% rokka_photo 09a38168946d9fdf1d6a86c57c2d07d73006d436 %}

In Bangall, I stopped to take a photo of the soon-to-open [Bangallworks
coworking space](http://www.bangallworks.com/)--nicely situated on the banks of a little creek
(perhaps an old mill building?). The owner saw me and came out of his
house (across the street) to chat. It's been interesting to see the
rise of these spaces in small Hudson Valley towns as more people are
able to telecommute part- or full-time.

{% rokka_photo d4fe73a16a4ce209b90491b982c219de0dcefe57 "Bangallworks coworking space" %}

A little further on a horse watched me take a picture from its barn.

{% rokka_photo 760da529c100fedad518d3d160d6a1883d17602c "Cases Corners" %}

Then, at mile 22, a little bit before my planned dinner stop in
downtown Rhinebeck, I heard a <i>sproing</i>ing sound. I'd broken a spoke.

{% rokka_photo 2de76227ee3b00fbbe479feee3ae839073dcf646 "Broken spoke" %}

I've never broken a spoke before this, but for years I have carried a
[FiberFix emergency replacement
spoke](https://www.peterwhitecycles.com/fiberfix.php). I attempted to use it:

{% rokka_photo 9e022c3effd698ddb3df630e6ec37172b6fe253e "FiberFix replacement spoke" %}

Unfortunately, even after starting over several times, I was not able
to get enough tension in the FiberFix spoke to pull the wheel back
into true. Eventually, I overtightened the FiberFix so far that the
metal part went back up through the spoke nipple, through my rim tape,
and into my tube, puncturing it. I took that as my sign to call it a
day. The sun was starting to set, I was cold and hungry, and I'd been
fighting with the FiberFix for most of an hour. I managed to find a
friendly Lyft driver who was able to take me to [Breakway
Cycles](http://breakawaycycles.bike/), about nine miles from where I
broke down. Thankfully they were still open and fully-equipped for
wheelbuilding.

While my wheel was being repaired I ended up chatting with another
customer at the shop who told me that she visited Ferncliff almost
daily to walk her dog. She gave me tips on specific campsites and
trails--very helpful, since I'd forgotten to print out a trail map
beforehand!

I'd originally hoped to reach my campsite in daylight, but by the time
my wheel was repaired, it was fully dark. I grabbed a quick dinner at
the Chinese restaurant next to the bike shop and then pedaled the
few remaining miles to the forest.

## Ferncliff Forest

Ferncliff reminded me more than anything of the "town forests" of
Vermont--small (at 200 acres--about the size of Inwood Hill Park in
Manhattan) and close to town (the center of Rhinebeck is two miles
away), but wild and scenic. Once the property of the Astor family, it
is now a private game refuge and forest preserve, bills itself as "the
second-best old growth forest in the Hudson Valley," and is open open
year-round for hiking and primitive camping.

Since it was dark and the ground was muddy, I decided not to bother
with my tent and spread my sleeping pad and bag in one of the lean-to
shelters along the trail. In late December I had my choice of
campsites; I chose one right along the shore of a small pond.

There was some wood left at the site from previous campers, and I
gathered some fallen sticks to serve as kindling, but I wasn't able to
get a fire going--perhaps because the kindling was wet from the rain,
perhaps because I'm not much good at building fires. For the rest of
the night I sat in my sleeping bag reading (Mary Gaitskill's excellent
[_The
Mare_](https://www.amazon.com/Mare-Novel-Mary-Gaitskill/dp/0307379744/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&linkCode=sl1&tag=electricliter-20&linkId=246198899dd9a945207864c6d5940e74),
set mostly in Rhinebeck!) and sipping whiskey under the full moon
until it was time to sleep.

## Sunday

I love tent camping, but waking up with a clear view of the pond and
woods was really something. I might have to try cowboy camping more
often.

{% rokka_photo f28bb4aed7d0bc84bcdda973d5dd710afd917b77 "Ferncliff Forest pond" %}

My original plan had been to hike to the observation tower Saturday
afternoon, but since I'd arrived after dark, I waited till the
morning. It was only a short hike from the lean-to, and offered
incredible views of the Catskills across the river to the west.

{% rokka_photo 0dfcdf6958e6dade9af671badb8482384b24133d "View from Ferncliff Forest observation tower" %}

After the hike I packed up and headed the few miles into Rhinebeck to
Pete's Famous Restaurant for eggs, bacon, toast, hash browns, orange
juice, and coffee. Then I headed toward Poughkeepsie, where I'd catch
the train home.

The only other time I'd ridden through this area (in May on a [200k
permanent](/keep-the-river-on-your-right/)), our route stayed on NY
Route 9 from Rhinebeck to Poughkeepsie--a busy road with fast traffic,
and not particularly scenic. For this trip, I'd plotted a route on
back roads for most of the way, and again I was pleased with how nice
these roads turned out to be.

{% rokka_photo 5432b9ecb0e48cf14e260d403e715e695afb8a88 "Bridge over the Landsman Kill at Vanderburgh Cove" %}

On this leg I had my second and final mechanical of the trip:

{% rokka_photo 0be452d1e80d606f8e52f25586debb4a083caedf "Saddlebag strap failure" %}

One of the leather straps holding my saddlebag to my saddle failed,
leaving it hanging askew (naturally, this happened as I was making a
left turn across traffic on one of the very few high-traffic sections
of the route). I try to carry a couple [Arno
straps](https://www.rei.com/product/833518/coghlans-arno-straps) on
all my overnight bike trips, and I was able to use one to secure the
saddle bag loop to one of the D-rings on the saddlebag. Earlier this
year at the Philly Bike Expo I spoke with one of the guys from [Swift
Industries](https://builtbyswift.com/), who made this bag; he told me
that in 2019 they will move away from using leather straps to nylon,
which I hope will be more secure.

I took the Dutchess Rail Trail the last mile or so into Poughkeepsie,
then had time to relax with some hot tea in the train station before
catching the 12:46pm train back to the city. Maybe I'm biased (after
all, tomorrow I'll take the train back up to Poughkeepsie to visit my
grandmother in nearby Pleasant Valley for Christmas), but in my
opinion this is one of the nicest parts of the Hudson Valley, with
some of the best riding, and I had a great time on this trip despite
the broken spoke.

([Saturday's planned route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/29072474), [Sunday's route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/29066702))