---
layout: post
title: Ride Report&#58; Bethpage 300k.
---

{% rokka_photo 356e5765511a5221bef071ee0c2d8ac734b54553 "Somewhere on Long Island" %}

At 6:00 AM Saturday I started the [Long Island
Randonneurs'](https://www.lirando.org/) Bethpage 300k--my first 300k,
and my longest-ever ride. I managed to finish a bit after midnight.

I did not do a great job of preparing for this ride. I hadn't ridden
much since the 200k in June: one 87-mile ride and a lot of puttering
around the city. I tried to ensure that I'd sleep well in the week
before the ride, avoiding alcohol completely and turning in early, but
I slept fitfully all week anyway--perhaps it was this awful, muggy
heatwave we are enduring in NYC right now, or maybe I was just
nervous.

I also struggled with an especially stupid technical problem as I
tried to prepare my bike for the ride. I run Compass Chinook Pass
(700cx28mm) tires on my Velo Orange Randonneur; they're great tires,
but mine were worn out. I was experiencing increasingly-frequent flats
and there was some cracking visible on the sidewall, and a few
sketchy-looking spots of abrasion. I had ordered a new pair from
Compass in order to start this ride with fresh tires, but try as I
might, I could not get the new tires mounted on my rims (the same rims
I'd previously mounted multiple new Chinook Pass tires on with no
problems). I tried lubricating the rim/tire interface, I tried the
Kool Stop tire bead jack--nothing worked. I simply could not get the
last bit of tire bead over the rim. I finally ended up posting to the
Internet-BOB listserv, where it turned out that several other people
had had similar problems with newer Chinook Pass tires. Finally [Jan
Heine
explained](https://groups.google.com/d/msg/internet-bob/fF9HzlcwFEo/76QCFyRECwAJ)
that there was a "new shape of the rubber surrounding the bead"; he
believes this is causing problems with some rims (like mine) which
don't have much of a central "trough." At any rate, I knew that even
if I managed to muscle these tires into place somehow, I would likely
have problems fixing a flat on the road, so at the last minute I
re-mounted the old tires, brought three spare tubes, and crossed my
fingers. (In the event, I had one flat; with the old tires it was a
matter of minutes to swap out the tube.)

The night before the ride was no more auspicious. Due to the early
start, I stayed at a nearby hotel with M--. But I procrastinated on
packing the bike and had to rush to catch the train at the last
minute, missing dinner (and losing my sunscreen en route). We then had
difficulty finding food near the hotel and ended up eating passable
Indian delivery at 11:30--hours after I'd hoped to be sound asleep.

I rode most of the way with Stuart, a randonneur I'd met earlier in
the season on the [Jones Beach
Populaire](https://eli.naeher.name/jones-beach-populaire/). For a
while we rode with Dan, a two-time _ancien_, and were regaled with
stories of Paris-Brest-Paris and London-Edinburgh-London. But after
the first manned control we went on by ourselves. The weather was hot
and humid, and it was a struggle to stay hydrated.

Given my poor preparation, and the fact that I'd never done this
distance before, I approached this ride very differently than the
[200k](https://eli.naeher.name/ronkonkoma-200k/). For that ride I'd
known I could handle the distance and wanted to keep my time down by
minimizing time spent at controls. For this one, I wasn't sure I could
even finish, so to avoid "the man with the hammer" I tried to err on
the side of eating and resting too much rather than too little. (At
Stuart's inspired suggestion, we did make an unscheduled stop for
crepes--having a little hot food was well worth the time spent.) And
this route had quite a few controls--eight not including the start or
finish--so the end result was that we spent quite a bit of time
stopped. (RideWithGPS says over two and a half hours, and I managed to
inadvertently stop recording with 30 miles left in the ride, so that's
probably too low). Despite this we were never in too much danger of
missing a cutoff, and we finished in 18:25. We were not quite the
_lanternes rouge_--two other riders remained on the course; one
abandoned shortly after our finish, while the other planned to
complete it.

The route starts and ends near the Bethpage station of the Long Island
Rail Road. But the LIRR had decided to close that section of the line
this weekend, so to get home I'd need to ride to the adjacent
Hicksville station, four-and-change miles away. As I set off following
the directions on my phone, a downpour began. As my phone led me onto
stranger and stranger back streets, I began to worry, and when I
stopped to check, I saw that somehow--perhaps the water soaking my
jersey or my gloves had triggered something on the touchscreen--it had
begun routing me to someplace called "K Uniforms," a twenty-mile
ride. I tried to re-enter my true destination, but my hands and phone
were so wet the touchscreen had become unusable. I stopped at a nearby
all-night pharmacy and dried my hands and the phone off with a coupon
circular, and was glad to realize that I'd at least been going in the
right direction; it was only another mile to the train. Back into the
downpour I went, and a few minutes later I was on the train back to
Queens.

([route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/28059706))