---
layout: post
title: Ride Report&#58; Jones Beach Populaire.
---
{% rokka_photo 046309ba0e1bef95c37d496aeef19cc5da57bd9a "Turnaround control at Jones Beach" %}

Yesterday I rode my second-ever RUSA-sanctioned ride (after the [Fox Valley Permanent](/fox-valley-permanent/)), and my first with other
riders: the [Long Island Randonneurs](https://www.lirando.org/)'
[Jones Beach
Populaire](https://www.lirando.org/randonneurs_permanents/#100k).

The ride was held the same day as the [New Jersey
Randonneurs](http://www.njrando.com/)' Cranbury 200k, which seems to
have drawn most of the more experienced crowd with the result that our
group was comprised largely of new randonneurs. (One notable exception
was a woman who had ridden in Paris-Brest-Paris.) I knew one rider
from an overnight with 718 Cyclery to Beartown State Forest last fall.

{% rokka_photo 57f40029ca8e3988e1ba58dd4699992af50d2532 "Riders gathered at the start" %}

We gathered ahead of the 8:00 am start at [MacDonald
Park](https://www.nycgovparks.org/parks/macdonald-park/highlights/12873)
in Forest Hills, Queens, in a fog we assumed would quickly burn off
but which in fact only grew heavier until early in the afternoon.

After bike checks and a few words from the RBA we were off through
eastern Queens; the route had many turns and navigation was a
challenge; I was very glad I'd brought printed cue sheets. When we
entered Nassau County the route began to alternate between quiet
suburban side streets and busy thoroughfares, until we reached the
Jones Beach Bikeway, where the fog grew thicker and the breeze
stronger as we approached the beach.

{% rokka_photo 3d8d186c8c1d44c165b34ddca4996ce900ef5955 "On the Jones Beach Causeway" %}

I visited Jones Beach as a child, but it's been probably twenty-five
years. It was no less vast than I remembered, and no less a temple to
the car than Robert Caro led me to expect. On this chilly, foggy April
day, with only a handful of people around, the effect was eerie.

{% rokka_photo afc243be617f0311c05d367a1158d2bd4cdd1e70 "One of many empty parking lots" %}

Our group arrived at the control around 11:00, where we restocked on
water and snacks. The RBA had advised us that we had the option to
continue along the bikeway to Tobay Beach and back for 120k, or to
turn around at the control itself for 100k; a couple of us were eager
to get going and headed off toward the Tobay Beach route. The fog was
so thick that we could never make out the water, even though we were
probably less than a hundred yards away.

The return route mostly retraced the outbound leg (another reason I
was glad to have my cue sheets, as the overlapping legs of the route
seemd to confuse GPS navigation). At some point we caught up with the
group which had skipped the Tobay Beach option, and we all rolled into
the final control together at around 2:30 pm, for a total time of
6h30m. (One rider's GPS recorded a total of 1h30m stopped time, which
seems plausible even though we'd spent no more than 15 minutes at the
control; we spent a _lot_ of time at traffic lights and stop signs on
this route. My own phone's recording of our ride was incomplete
because I'd neglected to start recording until well into the ride.)

It was wonderful to finally get a chance to do a real randonneuring
event, and I'm hoping to fit in at least one longer brevet this
season. While the route did not change my feeling toward riding on
Long Island, I enjoyed having a RUSA event so local that I could ride
to the start from my doorstep in Queens. Thanks to the Long Island
Randonneurs for organizing a great introduction to the sport!

([route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/27349756))