---
layout: post
title: Another Peekamoose overnight.
---

{% rokka_photo 5683d3d77fbdbeac022330d3e991f1ac12552073 "Hudson Valley Restaurant Equip." %}

I've enjoyed my last few bike-camping trips with 718 Cyclery and the
NYC Adventure Cycling Club, but I hadn't done a solo trip for what
felt like a long time. I'd missed the feeling of being out in the
woods by myself: reading by the fire, feeling the quiet settle in. So
when a weather window coincided with a free weekend, I packed my gear
for another overnight at Peekamoose in the [Sundown Wild
Forest](https://www.dec.ny.gov/lands/75346.html#Camping).

## Saturday

This was my fourth time camping there; I'd gone once with M-- by car,
[once by myself](/peekamoose), and on the [Catskills
tour](/catskills-tour/) with 718 last fall we spent a (very, very wet)
night at Peekamoose Lower Field. Since it's no longer practical for me
to ride there from my door as I could when we lived in Newburgh, I
took the 8:45 am train from Grand Central to Poughkeepsie and began my
trip on the Walkway over the Hudson.

I thought I'd change things up a little on this trip and planned my
route so that I'd arrive at the campsite from the north, instead of
the south as I've done in the past. I pretty quickly made it up to
Rosendale and then continued north, passing the impressive lime kilns
from the region's cement industry heyday.

{% rokka_photo debdf0ad998ef21007f161b6e432a40359aead0e "Rosendale lime kilns" %}

I stopped in Stone Bridge for some snacks and groceries for dinner, at
the [Davenport Farms](http://www.davenportfarms.com/) stand and then a
nearby supermarket. (Later in the ride I'd pass the Davenport farm
itself, on Hurley Mountain Road.) Normally I try to wait to buy dinner
supplies until near the end of the ride, to avoid carrying heavy
groceries further than necessary, but this was the last real store I'd
pass; there would be no services to speak of for the next forty-plus
miles!

I'd chosen a less direct route that went further northeast than
necessary, then cut back on the interesting-looking Stone Road. This
turned out to be a charming dirt track with a 10mph speed limit:

{% rokka_photo c2c9a0758d50823b49499a62e75f2cc3dbf26fd1 "10mph" %}

Later, though, I encountered an excavator operator who was none too
pleased by my passage; beyond him the road turned private. I couldn't
stomach backtracking to NY-28, so I took my chances; the private
section ended up being very sort, and soon enough I was back on the
public (and paved) Quarry Road. Next time, I'll bypass this whole
section (and cut off some mileage) by taking Ashokan Road from Hurley
Mountain Road all the way to Beaverkill Road.

The highlight of this northern approach was the stretch along the
Ashokan Reservoir, where you can ride along the dam itself (closed to
cars, but open to bikes and pedestrians). I'd never ridden here
before; the views were stunning.

{% rokka_photo 008c6b9dcf7286bdc95dbf8837122e084b802be6 "Ashokan Reservoir" %}

Ironically, I was running low on water. Because there is no faucet at
Peekamoose, I'd brought my [Platypus
GravityWorks](https://www.rei.com/product/849794/platypus-gravityworks-water-filter-system-kit-2-liter)
filter; I dug it out of my bag and refilled both bottles from a
stream. Then I was on High Point Mountain Road, which I'd ridden
before in the other direction two years ago. On that ride, I'd noticed
the [Ashokan Dreams](http://www.ashokandreams.com/) B&B perched
dramatically far above the reservoir; it seems the neighbors found it
less charming than I did, and this road is now festooned with [signs
complaining about the weddings held at the
B&B](https://hudsonvalleyone.com/2017/01/28/olive-neighbors-sue-saying-weddings-at-ashokan-dreams-are-illegal/).

A little earlier on that 2016 ride, I'd experienced a truly
vertiginous descent along Peekamoose Road; this time, going the other
direction, it would be a terrifying climb. I will confess: I walked
the whole thing. I didn't even bother shifting into the little ring of
my triple. There was no point; I wasn't fooling anyone; I was not
going to make it up that climb on two wheels, sixty miles into my day
with a full camping load.

When at least I reached the top (the hill seemed endless) I got back
on the bike and enjoyed the descent the rest of the way to the
campsite. I set up camp and was too tired even to ride the mile or two
ahead to the little camp store in Sundown (which is only irregularly
open anyway) for firewood, so I made a fire with fallen branches,
boiled some ramen, read a little, and turned in for the night.

{% rokka_photo d737f21eb10e84ca0b5e6ae29218d94a233d893e "Camping alongside the creek" %}

## Sunday

It rained during the night but it stopped before I woke up, though the
woods were still foggy and damp. I brewed my tea and lingered too long
over Hernan Diaz's excellent novel [_In the
Distance_](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0761189JD/ref=dp-kindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8&btkr=1);
eventually I had to put the book down and pack up.

{% rokka_photo 2b5dbaea9cc0fafb524930f32e5e480a7d251e8f "A red eft observes me striking camp." %}

I headed south from the campsite past the Rondout Reservoir on NY-55A
to Napanoch and past Eastern and Ulster Correctional
Facilities. Eastern has been home to a number of political prisoners,
including [Jalil Muntaqim](http://www.freejalil.com/) and, until
April, [Herman
Bell](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/27/nyregion/herman-bell-parole.html).

{% rokka_photo 9c3acd9ebb8aa8ec4b63262945ad087e7e16c3c8 "Ulster Correctional Facility" %}

After Napanoch I took the (very scenic) Berme Road into High Falls,
where I stopped for a much-needed hot meal at [The Last
Bite](https://hudsonvalleyone.com/2015/10/17/cheers-with-eggs-the-last-bite-in-high-falls/). A
tired cyclist couldn't ask for a better breakfast stop; the food was
quick and delicious, the atmosphere unpretentious, and counter service
means you can eat quickly and get back on the road--which I did.

The rest of the ride back was uneventful until Poughkeepsie: a long,
boring stretch on NY 213, then a few back roads to the Hudson Valley
Rail Trail in Highland, which connects to the Walkway over the
Hudson. The elevator from the walkway was out of order, so I had to
ride further east to the point where the trail is at grade again. And
of course it was here--minutes from the train station--that I got my
only flat of the trip. It was a pinch flat, courtesy of the parking
lot at the trailhead, over which you must ride to exit the trail, and
which might as well have been designed to cause flats; it's dirt with
an incredible quantity of very sharp rocks very firmly embedded in the
ground. It was a slow enough leak that I was able to pump up the tire
and make it to the station without changing a tube. I hadn't checked
the schedule ahead of time. I checked the departures board; the next
train was in one minute. Somehow I made it (despite cordoned-off
stairs and a slow elevator to the platform). I changed the tube on the
train between the Tarrytown and the Harlem-125th St. stops (I waited
until this section, where the train runs express and there are long
periods between stops, so that I could work in the car's door area
without getting in anyone's way; it was the only part of the car with
enough space to fix the flat.)

I was feeling pretty pleased with my flat-fixing skills when I left
Grand Central and headed east on 42nd St. I made it half a block when
my chain broke. At home, on my workstand tool shelf, was my chain
tool, which I'd debated bringing; it's a bit heavy and I'd decided to
leave it. I'd never broken a chain before and figured I wasn't a
strong enough rider to do so. Needless to say, I won't make that
mistake again; if my chain had failed earlier in the day, in the
Catskills, where cell service is almost nonexistent and it can be tens
of miles to the nearest gas station, I'd have had a very long walk
ahead of me. As it was, I had only to walk seven blocks up and two
over, to [Kickstand Bicycles](http://www.kickstandbicyclesnyc.com/) on
49th St., where the mechanic was kind enough not to dwell too long on
my idiocy while he fitted a new chain and freewheel on his sidewalk
work stand. Duly chastened, I made it home to Queens without further
incident.

([outbound route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/27399292), [inbound route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/27399414))