---
title: Fahnestock overnight.
layout: post
---
{% rokka_photo 9c8a84d37d293f8c7d384db0f4f65c11e3d176fa "Clarence Fahnestock State Park" %}

The past weekend there were two groups organizing bike overnights out
of New York: 718 Cyclery's [Mountain Lakes Park
microtour](https://www.718tripsandtours.com/2018-microtour-1) and NYC
Adventure Cycling Club's [ride to Fahnestock State
Park](https://www.meetup.com/NYC-Adventure-Cycling-Club/events/248083728/). I
vacillated until the last possible moment but ended up riding with the
Adventure Cycling folks because I am lazy and their starting point was
closer to my apartment (at the Queens entrance to the Queensboro
Bridge).

Saturday brought nearly perfect weather, in the high 70s--the first
time I've been in shorts this year. It was almost enough to distract
me from my loathing for the North and South County Trails. (They are
boring, mostly ugly, parallel busy and noisy highways for much of
their length, and--when ridden northbound--present a false flat for
nearly their entire length. The grade is never enough to be
interesting, but just enough to sap one's energy and will to live.)

The 718 group was riding a similar route for much of the way, and I
ran into a number of micro-tour riders I knew from previous rides. I
hadn't realized my treachery would be so quickly exposed!

We left the trail in Yorktown Heights and the road turned steeply
upward toward Clarence Fahnestock State Park. (The main campground is
closed this year for improvements, but we had a group site a few miles
away.)

Although there were 30-odd riders total, we ended up splitting into
different groups along the way. The group I arrived with had plenty of
daylight left, and, hot and sweaty, we went in search of a rumored
swimming hole, which we found down a fire road after a few false
starts. The water was numbingly cold, but deeply refreshing after the
long, hot day.

{% rokka_photo 3486c9a24dd7d50cbc8dd404e8dfa0dd2bb63d33 "Swimming hole at Christa's Point" %}

As night fell, the temperature dropped. I'd known the nice weather
wouldn't last, and had packed based on early forecasts that the
temperature would fall to the high forties or so. But in fact it hit
the low thirties overnight, and my quilt was not sufficient; I was
cold and slept poorly.

I woke up with the sun, around six, and I'd lost interest in riding
back as I'd originally planned. I had brought gloves and a jacket, and
maybe they'd have been enough if I'd waited a bit for the sun to warm
things up, but I was eager to get home, so I rode the quick eight
miles or so to Cold Spring. The ride was mostly downhill, but the few
short hills at the beginning quickly convinced me I was making the
right decision; the previous day had taken more out of me than I'd
realized and my legs had nothing left.

A few other rides caught up with me at the Cold Spring station and we
caught the 8:16 train back to Grand Central together.

{% rokka_photo 2d4fcebdc53ae7a1c61daf708f6276700ba0813e "At the Cold Spring waterfront, with Storm King in the background" %}

([route](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/22108822))