---
layout: post
title: Easter ride in the Housatonic Valley.
---

{% rokka_photo 0ccc2a "Connecticut back road" %}

Since I moved to Queens I've been trying to get back into the habit of
taking the train to ride my bike in interesting places as I did when I
lived in Chicago ([1](/sugar-river-again), [2](/harvard-kenosha),
[3](/ramble), [4](/crystal-lake-aurora)). Some of my attempts
([Greenwich to Peekskill](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/20782315))
have been more successful than others ([Greenwich to
Bridgeport](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/21400930) [to New
Haven](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/21400931)) but I always enjoy
finding new roads. And since I did some exploring in the mid-Hudson
while I lived in Newburgh, I've been focusing on the new-to-me areas
along the Harlem and New Haven Metro-North lines.

On Easter Sunday I took the 8:10 train to Brewster (New York) with
plans to ride up to Kent (Connecticut) and back. (In fact, I'd
forgotten it was Easter until my lunch stop, but I suppose I have the
holiday to thank for the low traffic.) I took the Look 585, which I
bought last fall (in Brewster!) and which I've been liking for these
kinds of day rides despite persistent shifting issues.

{% rokka_photo 45c097 "Birch Hill Road, Putnam County, NY" %}

The day started off cloudy, and there was even a little bit of rain
around the time I stopped for lunch at the [Bull's Bridge
Inn](http://www.bullsbridge.com/) near the eponymous covered
bridge. But by the time I'd finished eating it had passed by.

{% rokka_photo 02b1bb "Bull's Bridge" %}

After lunch I headed up Schaghticoke Road, through the Schaghticoke
Indian Reservation and into Kent through the grounds of the Kent
School ([built on land stolen from the
reservation](https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/28/nyregion/schaghticoke-tribe-connecticut-fights-for-piece-of-casino-industry.html)). I'd
originally planned to eat lunch here, at my turnaround point, but
since I'd gotten hungry early and eaten at Bull's Bridge I only
stopped for a few minutes to enjoy the sun that had begun to come out
and eat some snacks in front of the town library.

From Kent I headed back down the other side of the Housatonic as far
as Bull's Bridge, then turned east. Unlike the outbound leg, my return
route mostly stayed away from the river, putting me in upland areas
where the climbing never seemed to end. I realized I'd badly
underestimated the amount of climbing and overestimated my fitness (a
winter in the flat city has cost me whatever climbing legs I'd had in
the Hudson Valley) and so it was a long, slow haul back to Brewster. I
caught the 6:10 train.

{%rokka_photo 795fb5 "fullsizeoutput_59e" %}

([route](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/21755238))
