---
layout: post
title: Touring Lake Champlain and the Green Mountains.
---

{% rokka_photo 3b45dd36ad423ed6f9de30d6ef1bc706f9ad2235 "It didn't look this clean by the end of the week" %}

_(Note: this is the first of two planned posts about this trip. In
this post, I'll describe my route and the events of each day of the
tour; in a followup post, I'll discuss some of my
gear&mdash;especially gear I haven't used before&mdash;and how it
worked on the road.)_

Last fall I visited Northampton, Massachussetts for work. Because I'm
a train guy, I took the [Amtrak
Vermonter](https://www.amtrak.com/vermonter-train). Because I'm a bike
guy, I noticed that each car on this train has a bike rack. Naturally,
I started thinking about a tour.

Last Saturday morning I boarded the northbound Vermonter at Penn
Station with my bike, bound for St. Albans near the Canadian
border&mdash;the end of the line. I arrived late, slept at a
bed-and-breakfast half a mile from the station, and set off the next
morning to tour Vermont.

## Sunday

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 4fca8e595f2a2aa8f1fcd35928d6a16bc7b7c7cf "Rolling hills and lake views on South Hero Island" %}
  <figcaption>Rolling hills and lake views on South Hero Island</figcaption>
</figure>

My plan was loosely this: to spend the first day riding the sections of
the [Champlain Bikeway](http://www.champlainbikeways.org/) on the
islands of Grand Isle, North Hero, and South Hero, ending up in
Burlington.

The weather was perfect, and the riding on the islands was everything
I'd hoped. There is Champlain Bikeway signage all along the route,
and even signage indicating rest areas, like the Snowfarm Vineyard,
which had a water barrel and portable toilet for cyclists.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo b7accbd37dd4cdc12bb7eed89289137a4f5ca192 "Snowfarm Vineyard" %}
  <figcaption>Snowfarm Vineyard</figcaption>
</figure>

Much of the route follows the shoreline, and the views of Lake
Champlain&mdash;and, across it, the Adirondacks&mdash;were spectacular.

Unfortunately, I didn't get to ride the famous causeway section of the
Island Line Trail from South Hero to Burlington, because the [bike
ferry](https://www.localmotion.org/bike_ferry)&mdash;necessary to get
across a 200-foot gap in the causeway&mdash;had closed for the season only
days before. Instead, I took US Route 2 back to the mainland, then
rode down to Burlington. (Sadly I did not fly across the water, as the
RideWithGPS track would indicate&mdash;I forgot to turn recording back on
for a bit after a crucial muffin stop.) Somewhere along here, I pulled
off the road in a narrow-shoulder section to let someone pass, lost
control in the adjacent very soft gravel, and broke my fall with my
left foot in a way that caused what I suspect is a subungual hematoma
in my left big toe; this toe would bother me for the rest of the trip.

Most of Sunday's route was fairly flat and I was able to make good
time, arriving in downtown Burlington around three. I'd left my shoe
covers at home and then regretted it the whole train ride north, so I
stopped at the [Outdoor Gear Exchange](https://gearx.com), an
incredible independent outdoor retailer, where I was able to grab new
shoe covers and a pair of neoprene gloves on clearance.[^1]

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo ba9e79e52456843270f957c33cbd2c36c335db1d "Outdoor Gear Exchange" %}
  <figcaption>Burlington's Outdoor Gear Exchange&mdash;like a giant REI, but cooler</figcaption>
</figure>

After shopping and dinner in Burlington, I took a lakefront bike trail
less than two miles to the [North Beach
Campground](https://enjoyburlington.com/place/north-beach-campground-2/),
a nice in-town campground immediately adjacent to the bike path and a
lovely beach. I believe this was the campground's last night for the
season; most of the developed Vermont campgrounds had closed the
weekend before. For the rest of the trip, I'd planned to stay at
various less-developed primitive camping areas which remained open
year-round.

I noticed a nice All-City bike with full fenders at the adjacent site,
and soon my neighbor came over and introduced herself: she was in town
from Pennsylvania for the Old Spokes Home's [Fall
Fundo](https://www.oldspokeshome.com/fall-fundo) ride! In general, the
amount of bike traffic and infrastructure in Burlington was
incredible; the waterfront trail on this blustery October evening
reminded of me Chicago's Lakefront Trail in mid-summer.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo c2c9521584d6530e63c041cf8754d68644a358b1 "North Beach in Burlington" %}
  <figcaption>After setting up my campsite I walked down to the beach for a
picture in the last of the light.</figcaption>
</figure>

([Saturday's route](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/28732066))

## Monday

I made two unpleasant discoveries on Monday morning. The first:

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 92a8d87cc7762021d16d212e9c3f24432a7e2a7f "Squirrel vs X-Pac" %}
  <figcaption>Squirrel bites in my front bag</figcaption>
</figure>

The extremely aggressive squirrels at this campground had gotten into
my food[^2] (I think it was the paprika in my [freeze-dried rice and
beans](https://www.dirtygourmet.com/red-beans-and-rice/) that was
calling to them) the night before when I'd left my front bag open for
a few minutes, so in the morning when I grabbed some clothing I
loosely closed it for the few minutes it took me to change&mdash;but
apparently loosely-closed wasn't closed enough, because when I got
back the squirrels had gotten into it again, and this time they'd
managed to chew holes in the bag's fabric itself!

This was annoying but not catastrophic, as the holes are in a section
that is covered when the roll-front closure is used, and frankly this
bag is not that waterproof anyway. The next discovery was a bigger problem:

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 44dc8a278f57a46958d77f50f6bdbeecd7133800 "Missing Velogical O-ring" %}
  <figcaption>The O-ring is gone!</figcaption>
</figure>

This is my [Velogical rim
dynamo](http://www.velogical-engineering.com/velogical-rim-dynamo---standard-bicycle-dynamo---smooth-running-lightweight-efficient),
which I've used for a while to power my front light, and which on this
trip I also planned to use in combination with the [Sinewave
Revolution](https://www.sinewavecycles.com/products/sinewave-revolution)
(a Christmas gift from M&mdash;) to charge my phone, rear lights (if
necessary), etc. There is a rubber O-ring which fits around the groove
at the top of the dynamo and constitutes the wear surface between the
rim and the dynamo. This O-ring had been there the day
before&mdash;when I'd been using the dynamo to charge my phone for much of
the day&mdash;but now it was nowhere to be seen! I scoured the campsite but
couldn't find any sign of it. Another victim of Burlington's
squirrels? I have no idea.

The O-ring I'd had had come with the dynamo, and was supposedly made
of some special extra-durable compound, but I hoped I could find
something locally that would work, and I was right. At the Ace
hardware store only about a mile away (in the wrong direction, of
course), I bought a number of different sizes of O-ring from their
plumbing section, and had the best results with one with an inner
diameter of 1 ¼". Whatever mysterious force had taken my original
O-ring didn't bother me again; the replacement remained undisturbed
for the remainder of the trip.

On my way out of town I stopped at [Handy's
Lunch](https://handyslunch.wordpress.com/) for a hearty diner
breakfast&mdash;during which it began to rain in earnest. It would rain
on-and-off throughout the day and into the night, but most of the time
it was a fairly light rain&mdash;nothing too hard to deal with.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 3d867d800f2d74c47c33a540181e430acd0897cd "Looking east from State Route 116" %}
  <figcaption>Looking east from State Route 116</figcaption>
</figure>

The day's lunch stop was the [Bristol Cliffs
Cafe](http://www.bristolcliffscafe.com/) in Bristol, where I ate a
very good chicken pot pie and warmed up with tea while I looked at various maps and tried to determine the best way to the US Forest Service campground at [Silver
Lake](https://www.fs.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsinternet/cs/recarea?ss=110920&navtype=BROWSEBYSUBJECT&cid=FSE_003738&navid=110240000000000&pnavid=110000000000000&recid=64909&actid=29&ttype=recarea&pname=Silver%20Lake%20Campground), my destination for the night.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 7f5cd8a183a83bad0dd6622554a4befb1ec790a1 "Bristol Cliffs Cafe" %}
  <figcaption>Looking out on gloomy weather from the Bristol Cliffs Cafe</figcaption>
</figure>

My [planned route](https://ridewithgps.com/routes/28703410) would have
taken me east from Bristol, up into the mountains, and then south to
the campground. But I'd been playing with the Komoot route-planning
app, and it suggested an alternate route that would take me out of
Bristol to the south, only turning east (and up) at the end of the
ride. I decided to give the Komoot route a try, thinking that less
time in the upper elevations would probably mean less climbing
overall.

For a while, the route was indeed quite pleasant.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 699caaa171b7ad4304e29351edaaafeea8c6d4be "Cabins around Lake Dunmore" %}
  <figcaption>Cabins around Lake Dunmore</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 8e4be4779eb49146ca5460c0737158bed6e8b980 "A cemetery of one, for a Union veteran" %}
  <figcaption>A cemetery of one, for a Union veteran of the Civil War</figcaption>
</figure>

At the end of the route, though, Komoot had decided&mdash;despite my
choosing the cycle-touring routing mode (the other options are road
and mountain biking)&mdash;to send me up the side of the mountain on
singletrack. (I would fail, at this point, to take the correct lesson
from this.) I don't mind a bit of underbiking, but the grades here
were too much for me, and I ended up pushing my bike much of the way.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo fce9ae24a1204067a124ca89627377203f16b658 "Trail from Route 53 to Silver Lake" %}
  <figcaption>Tame by mountain-biking standards, I know, but a little much on 28mm tires with a fall camping load</figcaption>
</figure>

The campground was, as far as I could tell, deserted, so I picked the
first campsite I came across, right next to the lake. A welcome break
in the rain let me set up my camp in semi-dry conditions, but it would
resume overnight, accompanied by vast thundering gusts of wind down
the mountainside. Sometimes a gust would be a bit higher up, and I'd
hear it in the treetops like a freight train; other times it would
come down to the ground and rattle my tent worryingly. I hadn't camped
in these conditions before and probably made errors in tent pitch and
site selection; the door to my tent flapped all night and sometimes
spray came in underneath, but I managed to keep mostly dry and warm
enough.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo bb254d80b5634a4ef681ee0aac143022eb9d54f0 "My campsite on Monday night." %}
  <figcaption>My campsite</figcaption>
</figure>

([Monday's route](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/28769817))

## Tuesday

Tuesday dawned crisp and windy, but the rain had stopped and the sun
was back. Breakfast was tea and a pastry I'd brought from Bristol the
day before. I'd arrived at the campsite via singletrack from State
Route 53 to the west; I planned to join Silver Lake Road, just to the
east of the campground, and head south. On my map, it looked like the
Leicester Hollow Trail would take me to the Goshen Trail, which went
to the parking area. But when I got to the junction, bikes were
prohibited on the Goshen Trail. I could (and should) have back-tracked
to take a service road that bent north and then around to Silver Lake
Road, but on my map I could see that the Leicester Hollow Trail
eventually met up with Forest Dale Road, to the south, which was where
I was trying to get to via Silver Lake Road anyway&mdash;and the trail was
more direct. Up until the junction, the trail had been fairly wide,
flat, and rideable&mdash;more like a fire road than singletrack. So I
decided to follow it south.

This was a terrible idea. It rapidly became narrower, rockier,
hillier, and mostly unrideable except for short stretches here and
there. It was also significantly longer than I'd realized&mdash;almost five
miles to the trailhead!

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 89dcdf9b392e494ea58fd956eaa4d79157fa13d4 "Leicester Hollow Trail" %}
  <figcaption>Komoot's maps show the Leicester Hollow Trail as S0, or the easiest possible singletrack; I don't agree</figcaption>
</figure>

The final straw came when I emerged from the woods, with the paved
road visible a couple dozen yards away&mdash;just past a bridge that was
under construction. Fortunately, the bridge worker had no problem
letting me roll my bike across the bridge even though they'd recently
poured concrete. I was finally on pavement, but well behind
schedule. It was 10:30, and this was supposed to be one of my longest
days at 80 hilly miles.

Today's lunch stop was Rutland, but conscious of the time pressure, I
kept it short, then pushed on&mdash;again, using Komoot to suggest a route
rather than following the route I'd designed on RideWithGPS. There was
a long climb up South Mountain, then a descent into Weston, where I
passed the Vermont Country Store.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 8210d63a728ff4675724b1ec47432ca3aa166821 "Vermont Country Store" %}
  <figcaption>A few years ago M— and I visited here with family; I hadn't realized that my route would take me past it.</figcaption>
</figure>

Past Weston and Londonderry I began to approach the foot of Stratton
Mountain just as dusk fell. Switching on my lights and donning my
reflective gear, I started up the mountain on the access road for the
ski resort. For me, in the dark, with 70 loaded miles in my legs,
this was a brutal climb&mdash;around 1300 feet in around five and a half
miles, with sections of 14% grade near the top. I took many breaks. I
walked several sections. I ate the almond scone I'd been saving for
the next day's breakfast. And then around 8pm I got to the top and realized that,
once again, Komoot wanted me to ride a two-mile section of so-called
singletrack to my destination, [Grout Pond campground](https://www.fs.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsinternet/cs/recarea?ss=110920&navtype=BROWSEBYSUBJECT&cid=FSE_003738&navid=110240000000000&pnavid=110000000000000&recid=64967&actid=29&ttype=recarea&pname=Grout%20Pond%20Recreation%20Area).[^3]
But this was far worse than even the steep fire road to Silver Lake
the night before. This "singletrack" was deeply rutted by the tread of
some kind of earthmoving equipment, and in those ruts water was
running several inches deep (though it hadn't rained all
day). Komoot's singletrack was more like a stream. Whatever wasn't
underwater was soft, deep mud which swallowed my feet completely. I
made it about ten yards (pushing and carrying my bike; it was nowhere
near rideable) before giving up.

I was exhausted, cold, and now wet and muddy as well. I tried on my
phone to find another route to the campground. It was grim: I'd have
to go back down the mountain, circle around to the other side, and
climb it again. And instead of being fewer than five miles from the
campground as I'd believed, if I took this other route it would be
more like fifteen. Realistically, with the climbing and my exhaustion,
it could be 10pm before I reached the campsite. I just couldn't do
it. I bailed to one of the many lodges on the mountain catering to
skiers.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 2f0540d93504d0b3ad649de72040463b3f89c7be "Ride the Trails - Vermont" %}
  <figcaption>Taunting sign in my room at the lodge</figcaption>
</figure>

([Tuesday's route](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/28781983))

## Wednesday

I woke up Wednesday discouraged to have spent the night indoors, but
eager to get back on the road. After extracting as many calories as I
could from the lodge's sad off-season continental breakfast (I believe
there was one other room occupied besides my own), I went back down
Stratton Mountain and retraced the previous day's route through
Londonderry and Weston, where I ate lunch at the Bryant House
restaurant (part of the Vermont Country Store). This time I was
following my planned route to the letter&mdash;no more Komoot for me.

Today was, at least, a shorter day&mdash;around 55 miles. The big climb was
(again) South Mountain, this time across its southern flank from west
to east.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo dc673eef04ee2098e1b23ff6729f3f80227a6245 "Apparently this climb is popular with the local roadies." %}
  <figcaption>Apparently this climb is popular with the local roadies</figcaption>
</figure>

Right at the top, as I pulled over to layer up for the descent, it
started to rain. The rain grew heavier, and by the bottom of the
descent into Ludlow, it was a fairly hard rain. I stopped at a Dunkin
Donuts and tried to wait it out; after a bit, it had lightened, though
it would continue to rain on and off for the rest of the day.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 8a5659f4de182b22dc8d868d0c4c023c5c84cf92 "" %}
  <figcaption>Just as the first drops began to fall</figcaption>
</figure>

After Ludlow I passed the Calvin Coolidge Historical Site and this cool little spring-fed fountain:

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo ad992eda5c6ad7ca0a279eda713cce510cadb9ed "Memorial spring" %}
  <figcaption>The plaque reads: "In memory of Carleton M. Lawrence, 1876-1956, District Commissioner, Vermont Highway Department, 1920-1947." I can't imagine a nicer memorial than a fountain for thirsty travelers.</figcaption>
</figure>

In Bridgewater I turned onto the dirt Curtis Hollow Road, then a
couple miles later onto the forest road leading into Calvin Coolidge
State Forest, where primitive camping is permitted year-round.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo e2c29512a6f6ffbb55dbbb75cf4163d96be46b9f "Calvin Coolidge State Forest" %}
  <figcaption>Forest road leading to the primitive camping area. Many of these roads, as well as the developed campground I passed on the
way&mdash;which was closed for the season&mdash;were built by the Civilian Conservation Corps, a fact which I like to imagine caused the ardently anti-New-Deal Coolidge great consternation.</figcaption>
</figure>

I made my camp in a clearing with a fire ring a few miles in&mdash;a
mistake, since once again the wind was savage all night, and the
clearing provided no shelter. The rain&mdash;which had stopped for a
bit&mdash;started back up as I pitched my tent, so I cooked my ramen
packets in the tent vestibule, then spent a chilly, windy night
listening to the wind and watching the rain turn to freezing rain,
then snow.

([Wednesday's route](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/28823942))

## Thursday

{% rokka_photo 1962a90d7ac20b37d83814ee4058129263b35927 "Calvin Coolidge State Forest campsite" %}

Thursday morning dawned cold and wet, with a dusting of snow on the
ground, a sheet of ice on my tent, and my bike shoes frozen solid. (I
burned some cotton-ball-and-vaseline firestarters to thaw them out
enough to get them on my feet.) As I was packing up, I discovered that
I'd lost my wallet from my front handlebar bag. I believe it fell out
either on the forest road to the campsite or at the campsite itself
the night before as I was unpacking. I looked for it, but it was a
lost cause with snow covering the whole clearing and, beneath the
snow, thousands of fallen leaves almost exactly the same shade of
brown as my wallet. Fortunately I carry a small card case in my jersey
pocket with one debit card, so I was still able to buy food for the
rest of the trip, but I'd lost my driver's license, credit card, and
the $200 I'd just taken out at the ATM at the Dunkin Donuts in Ludlow
on Wednesday afternoon.

I was discouraged, but couldn't spend much time looking as my feet&mdash;in
wet socks and wet shoes, with the temperature below freezing&mdash;were
growing increasingly cold and numb. I had to warm up quickly, so I
made the descent back to Bridgewater, where the [Bridgewater Corners
Country Store](http://www.bridgewatercornerstore.com/) was fortunately
open (nothing else was) and serving coffee and (massive) cinnamon
rolls.

Somewhat warmed, I set off toward Randolph, where I'd catch the
southbound Vermonter home the next morning. Originally, my plan had
been to proceed through Randolph to camp at Roxbury State Forest,
about 15 miles further; but those 15 miles were largely uphill, and
after the previous night I was less enthusiastic about backcountry
camping at higher elevations, so I was hoping to find a place to camp
in Randolph itself.

But I'd pass through several other towns on my way. The first was
Woodstock&mdash;the Windsor County seat and visibly prosperous (a branch of
the Rockefeller family kept a farm nearby, now a historic site). At
the local library, which was having a book sale, I picked up (for $3)
a paperback in anticipation of the long train ride home (John
Lanchester's _The Debt to Pleasure_, chosen in part because I've
enjoyed his other writing, and in part because of its extremely
packable size).

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 947e6bd676f43f07a6e3c2ed5a907b23a4a8bcac "Norman Williams Public Library in Woodstock" %}
  <figcaption>The Woodstock library is stunning inside and out, with beautiful wood-paneled reading rooms, a vaulted ceiling, and marble walls</figcaption>
</figure>

After Woodstock came Barnard (where I stopped at the Barnard General
Store&mdash;[established
1832!](http://www.happyvermont.com/2015/07/23/saving-the-barnard-general-store/)&mdash;for
chili and a sandwich), then Bethel, then Randolph.

In Vermont (I learned) it's common for small towns to have a "town
forest." Randolph has several, one of them behind a cemetery less than
a mile from the downtown Amtrak platform, and that's where I hoped to
camp. I hung this hope on one sentence in the town's [web site
blurb](https://randolphvt.org/?SEC=D621EEE8-4560-43B9-9587-E39F1559E0FF)
for the forest: "Walk the paths, take a picnic, and even sleep under
the trees, all within walking distance of downtown." I took that to
mean camping was permitted, and indeed, when I arrived, the signs were
clearer: you can camp for up to three days, and you can even build a
fire!

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo e790bb15babac21bc6fb617c69c279382da790aa "Randolph Town Forest campsite" %}
  <figcaption>Last campsite of the trip</figcaption>
</figure>

The forest abuts the rail line, and Thursday evening as I sat reading
by my fire, I watched the northbound Vermonter speed past. This
low-lying site was nicely sheltered from the wind, and I slept soundly
despite a low temperature in the twenties.

([Thurdsay's route](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/28849933))

## Friday

I took down my tent for the last time (dog-walkers were already out on
the trail) and walked my bike out of the forest and into town, where I
found a hospitable coffee shop to kill a few hours until my
mid-morning train.

([full photo album](https://www.icloud.com/sharedalbum/#B0qG4TcsmGHOAbX))

[^1]: The shoe covers&mdash;from Craft&mdash;turned out to be astonishingly shoddy. The uppers began to separate from the lower section after less than a day. The velcro strap across the bottom of one shoe cover fell off day or two after that. I managed to keep them going for another day or two with duct tape, and they were better than nothing for the few days they remained usable, but if I'd paid the full price ($60!) for these I'd be apoplectic. Even at $15 they were a rip-off. Don't buy anything from Craft.

[^2]: I planned to hang my food to keep it safe from bears in the more remote campgrounds, but hadn't bothered at North Beach since this campground is right within the city of Burlington and was full of RVs, barbecues, etc.

[^3]: I had seen earlier when planning with Komoot that a short section of singletrack was included, but had misread the map and believed this was simply the campground access road described in the US Forest Service map of Grout Pond, which is vehicle-accessible.