---
layout: post
title: Sleeping outside in 2021.
---

After [posting about all of my camping trips in 2019](/trips), I
skipped that ritual last year. But today I sat down and did the
exercise again. In 2021, I spent 31 nights outside (if I'm counting
correctly)--fewer than in 2020, more than in 2019.

(Maybe at some point I'll go back and post about all of those 2020
trips.)

## 🥾 December 31-January 1
{% rokka_photo 32e3b4 "New Year's Day ice storm views" %}

New Year's Eve camping with M-- at the top of Alander Mountain, the
ascent of which was deeply treacherous because there'd been an ice
storm and we didn't bring the microspikes. Yes, I'm double-counting
this one for both 2020 and 2021.

## 🥾 January 16-17
{% rokka_photo e33b0a "On the way out" %}

You can't camp at Minnewaska but you can hike through it and camp
in the adjoining Witch's Hole State Forest, which we did. With Daniel,
Sean, and Esmi.

## 🥾 February 6-7
{% rokka_photo 4d284b "Postholed out" %}

We thought for sure the trails at Harriman would be packed down. They
weren't. Miles of postholing later, we found the shelter already
taken. But we found this spot--better than the shelter, I
think--nearby.

## 🥾 March 6-7
{% rokka_photo 6da8b0 "View from the Roosa Gap fire tower" %}

Shawangunk Ridge Trail solo overnight through Minnewaska State Park,
Roosa Gap State Forest, and Wurtsboro State Forest. (This trail is
also part of the Long Path.) An under-rated little ridge, with a lot
of cool open landscapes.

## 🚲 March 13-14
{% rokka_photo 3c45cd "M-- by the reservoir" %}

The "secret spot" with M--.

## 🚲 March 20-21
{% rokka_photo 824d1e "Chris at the end of the bonus mud section." %}

Weekend service to Wassaic hadn't yet resumed, so we did a pretty long
day from Brewster to Beebe Hill, and then another long day to
Poughkeepsie. By the end we were pretty cooked.

## 🚲 March 26-27
{% rokka_photo 2a21d0 "Riding home" %}

Rode to California Hill with a bunch of [NYC
ADV](https://www.nycadv.com) folks.

## 🥾 April 16-17
{% rokka_photo 151b7e "Lake Skenonto" %}

A classic Harriman overnight to Lake Skenonto with Daniel, Sean, and
Esmi. It wasn't supposed to rain, but it did.

## 🚲 May 1-2
{% rokka_photo 6010e2 "Scenic overlook" %}

A lovely mixed-terrain ride along the Delaware Water Gap with the NYC
ADV crew.

## 🚲 June 5-6
{% rokka_photo 6b1c8c "ADV Crew" %}

The "clubhouse" at Harriman is _the_ classic NYC ADV ride destination,
but I hadn't been there in years. Riding through Jersey isn't the most
scenic, but it turns out that with a great group it's still a ton of
fun.

## 🚲 June 12-13
{% rokka_photo ff042a "Cemetery lunch stop" %}

I rode to New Forge State Forest because the map showed a swimming
hole (something I have never seen indicated on any other DEC map). The
swimming hole _does_ exist, but it required some pretty intense
bushwacking to get there; most of this state forest is very dense with
brush. I cowboy camped on my Thermarest Uberlite pad and punctured it
irreparably, so I spent the night on the ground. (Thermarest replaced
it under warranty, and then they replaced the replacement when a
baffle failed on the first night. I'm still trying to decide if I dare
try to use the second replacement or if I should sell it to somebody
luckier.)

## 🚲 July 7-10
{% rokka_photo 19d9a7 "Fording a stream in the rain" %}

Mike and I (and Isaac, who joined for the first two days) had
scheduled time off work for this tour and as it approached, the
forecast got worse by the day. It ended up raining three of the four
days of this trip--hard enough to kill Isaac's phone. After a very wet
first night in our tents, we diverted to lean-tos for the remaining
two nights. On the second night a friendly local brought us some dry
firewood at the top of Beebe Hill.

## 🚗 July 24-25
{% rokka_photo 39c2c6 "The next morning" %}

M-- and I spent the weekend driving around the Hudson Valley, and
camped at Hand Hollow next to this lovely pond. Luckily the rain
didn't start until after we went to bed.

## 🛶 August 16-21
{% rokka_photo ff30bb "Our best campsite" %}

My first canoe-camping experience! We (Emily, Annie, Michael, and I)
did the Floodwood Pond loop. As with most of my trips this summer, it
rained a good deal and we spent plenty of time under a tarp while
Emily taught us to play euchre.

## 🚲 September 4-6
{% rokka_photo 166743 "The requisite photo with the abandoned bus." %}

[Roundabout
Brattleboro](https://bikepacking.com/routes/roundabout-brattleboro/)
bikepacking route with Chris D. One of the hardest and best rides I've
ever done. My rando bike was totally outgunned by this terrain (I
broke a spoke), but I can't stop thinking about going back.

## 🚲 September 18-19
{% rokka_photo 01f55e "M-- and I at the campsite (Annie's photo)" %}

M-- and I rode from Brewster to California Hill to meet a group of NYC
ADV folks riding from White Plains. This was my first night out in my
new hammock.

## 🚗 October 8-10
{% rokka_photo d3efbc "View from our campsite at Big Sur" %}

I love the East Coast but primitive camping by the ocean at Big Sur
was absolutely a peak experience, and the highlight of our road trip
from LA to Portland.

## 🚗 October 11-12
{% rokka_photo 0b2b35 "Burlington Campground" %}

Camping in the redwoods along the Avenue of the Giants wasn't too
shabby either.

## 🚗 October 12-13
{% rokka_photo ff9c1b "Elk Prairie Campground" %}

I thought "Elk Prairie" was just a nice evocative name for this
campground, but in fact it was quite literal.

## 🚗 October 13-14
{% rokka_photo b3aff7 "Baker Beach" %}

This campground was empty and a little eerie, but the adjacent beach
was lovely.

## 🚲 October 22-24
{% rokka_photo e136ae "NYC ADV camp" %} 

I missed last year's Nutmeg Nor'easter but this year we had a big NYC
ADV contingent and the ride was wonderful. I sent my derailleur into
the spokes with eight miles to go; some friendly New Haven bike coop
folks helped me get the bike rideable but I still had to limp back to
camp in a single gear. Back in the city it took a month and $300 to
get the dropout repaired.

## 🚲 November 27-28
{% rokka_photo 6edd6b "Chris in the snow" %}

By the time my bike was repaired I was desperate to camp, and I'd
planned a ride to Alander Mountain with Chris 2. Conditions were
considerably more wintry than we'd bargained for, and the
mostly-rideable trail into the site turned into arduous hike-a-bike
with snow on the ground. But we had a nice fire and some whiskey to
keep us warm.
