---
layout: post
title: Riding the VTXL.
---

{% rokka_photo 85b187 "Somewhere pretty in Vermont" %}

Ever since my [2018 tour](/vermont), I've been
itching to get back to Vermont. Last Labor Day weekend I rode Joe
Cruz's [Roundabout
Battleboro](https://bikepacking.com/routes/roundabout-brattleboro/)
route over three days with my friend Chris, and it only whetted my
appetite for more.

I dreamed of doing Cruz's longer gravel route: the
[VTXL](https://bikepacking.com/routes/vtxl/), which stretches the
length of the Green Mountain State, from the Canadian border in the
remote Northeast Kingdom to the Massachusetts border outside
Williamstown, Massachusetts. But it didn't seem possible with the bike
I have (my trusty, if hard-used, Velo Orange Randonneur). I'd done
Roundabout Brattleboro on this bike with the 32mm slicks it was
spec'ed for, and I'd done a ton of walking on the rutted snowmobile
trails that make up so much of that route--and broken a spoke
anyway. At 300 miles, the VTXL is more than twice as long as
Roundabout Brattleboro; I figured it would have to wait until I found
a new, proper gravel bike.

But it turns out that new gravel bikes are hard to come by in 2022,
especially if you're as picky and as cheap as I am. And then I
discovered that I could squeeze 38mm knobbies onto my old rando
bike--just barely, and with essentially no margin for mud or wobbly
wheels, and if I hit a pothole I could hear the rando rack rub on the
tire, but the thing was rideable. And somehow I found I'd agreed to do
the ride with my friend Alex over the week of the Fourth of July.

So on July 2 we drove up to Williamstown to drop our car and pick up a
one-way U-Haul (the most expedient way to get to the remote northern
end of the route, where public transit is nonexistent). Alex had
finished building up his Black Mountain Cycles monster cross bike only
days before--its only shakedown a short after-work ride on a local
trail--and stopped at the bike shop in Williamstown to fix his
tubeless setup. The shop folks helpfully informed us that we'd have
"the skinniest tires on the route" (me on 38s and Alex on 42s) and
that riders on similar setups finished the route looking "pretty beat
up." Thus encouraged, we drove north.

When we dropped off the U-Haul six or seven miles and one hill away
from the town where we'd start our ride in the morning, we realized we
had only 45 minutes to get to the only restaurant for miles before it
closed. Fully loaded we averaged 17 miles an hour for those six or
seven miles; about 10mph more than our average for the rest of the
trip.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo c76f1b "Outside the restaurant in Canaan" %}
  <figcaption>Outside the restaurant in Canaan</figcaption>
</figure>

After dinner (at which we encountered a couple of cyclotourists on
their way to Montreal from Portland, Maine) we set up camp across the
street at the [Champion Meadow](https://www.championmeadow.com)
campground, watched the fire for a bit, and went to sleep.

## Sunday: Canaan to Burke

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 72708d "An early climb. Photo courtesy of Alex Estes." %}
  <figcaption>An early climb. Photo courtesy of Alex Estes.</figcaption>
</figure>

The VTXL wastes no time and it is not subtle; the grade hits 14% in
the first half mile. After that climb is another one, and then
another. We stopped for lunch in Island Pond, then pushed on toward
Burke, where we had reservations at the campground run by the Burke
Mountain Resort--chosen in part for its location about 60 miles into
the ride, but also, importantly, because camping there would allow us
hot tub privileges at the resort.

A friendly resort worker passed us on the route near our turnoff and
stopped to chat. When we told her where we were camping, there was an
alarming pause, and then she told what we hadn't been able to tell
from the map: that the last two miles to the campground involved an
800-foot climb. Oh, well. Wanting to be done with the day, we skipped
the lively restaurants in East Burke village and crawled our way up
the hill to a campground packed full of mountain bikers. (Burke is
right in the middle of the famous Kingdom Trails.) After a dinner at
the resort restaurant, I finally made it into the hot tub I'd been
thinking about all day.

([day one ride](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/95388943))

## Monday: Burke to West Topsham

{% rokka_photo 9da594 "A church near East Orange" %}

Morning came and we descended the mountain for an excellent breakfast
at East Burke's Cafe Lotti. Somehow we had convinced ourselves that
the first day would be the hardest; this wasn't true, as became clear
today. The first day had plenty of climbing, but also long flat
sections; the second day had none of these. We spent the whole day
either climbing or (too-briefly) descending.

Our planned lunch stop in Danville turned out to be closed, and
although I had plenty of snacks, I always have a hard time eating
enough food fast enough "on the wheel"; by the last third of this
ride, I was moving very slowly.

To stay on schedule to finish in five days, we hoped to reach route
mile 120; but there was no campground anywhere near that point in the
route. There was a country store, and we decided we would ask at the
store for advice on local camping spots; at worst, we'd find a place
to stealth camp off the road.

Finally we descended a steep, rough ATV trail into West Topsham and
arrived at the store. Initially, it didn't feel promising; the store
was small, but right in the village, which seemed too crowded for
stealth camping. We could perhaps have camped back up along the ATV
trail, but the idea of climbing that hill again, in the wrong
direction, was not appealing, and in any case there was no water up
there. The first local we asked suggested we camp at a local
ballfield, but it was almost 10 miles away, and would have put us on
the wrong side of a ridge from the route for the next day.

But our fortunes soon took a turn for the better: the unprepossessing
kitchen at the back of the store turned out to yield unexpectedly good
pizza, and the friendly couple who live above the store offered to let
us set up camp out back. Alex set up in the yard and I followed a
short trail into the woods to hang my hammock near the river.

([day two ride](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/95493550))

## Tuesday: West Topsham to Queechee

{% rokka_photo ab1d31 %}

We rose around seven. I was mindful of bonking the day before and
stocked up on sugary things at the store, including a bag of Swedish
Fish that would get me up the worst hills for the remainder of the
VTXL.

This morning we ran into the only other VTXL rider we'd see on the
route, a solo northbound rider on a hardtail. He told us there was
another southbound group ten miles ahead of us, but we never managed
to catch them.

There was rain in the forecast, and around noon it started to
drizzle. As the afternoon went on the drizzle grew heavier and
heavier, so when we arrived in Sharon for our late-lunch stop after a
seven-mile descent we were both covered in mud.

On the VTXL route map there are two stores and a restaurant marked in
Sharon; but Tracy's Midway Station turned out to be out of business,
and Sandy's Takeout Restaurant was closed on Tuesdays. That left the
Sharon Trading Post (now run by Maplefields). I was so filthy that I
went into the bathroom to wash the mud off my face (!) before I felt
presentable enough to order my coffee, sandwich, and fries.

We lingered in the store for a bit, charging batteries and watching
the rain through the window. Under such circumstances, and knowing
that one major climb lay between us and our campsite for the night, it
was hard to find the motivation to start riding again.

Eventually, during a break in the rain, we did. At the top of Galaxy
Hill Road, we saw that the road we were to descend was closed. We
crossed our fingers that it would be passable by bike, and it was. At
the bottom, the rain picked up; but by the time it really started
storming, later that night, we had already set up camp at our lean-to
site in Queechee State Park.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 5486e1 "Alex navigates the closed road" %}
  <figcaption>Alex navigates the closed road</figcaption>
</figure>

([day three ride](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/95590719))

## Wednesday: Queechee to Winhall Brook

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo d6e884 "Queechee Gorge near our campsite" %}
  <figcaption>Queechee Gorge near our campsite</figcaption>
</figure>

It rained overnight but the morning was clear, and we got back on the
road after a disappointing (but caloric) breakfast in Queechee. More
climbing, of course. There'd be only one stop with services all day,
in Cavendish/Proctorsville, around mile 40, and we weren't sure what
to expect. As usual, the restaurants on the route map were closed, but
the incredible [Singleton's General Store](https://singletonsvt.com)
was open. Not only do they have a live beehive built into the wall
next to their front door, they also make great sandwiches with meat
from whole animals butchered on the premises. I had brisket, mustard,
and caramelized onions on rye bread and it was one of the best things
I've eaten this year. Maybe it was a bit heavy considering the
climbing we had ahead of us still, but it was so worth it.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo afe570 "Best sandwich of the trip" %}
  <figcaption>Best sandwich of the trip</figcaption>
</figure>

Proctorsville is a mile or so off course, and as we'd ridden into town
that mile felt gently downhill. So I was expecting a bit of a climb
back to the route. But a funny thing happened: it felt like a descent
on the way back, too! I have no explanation for this phenomenon. Maybe
it was the sandwich, or maybe the city planners of Proctorsville have
learned the secret of building roads that are downhill both ways. Of
course, once we rejoined the route, it was back to climbing.

A couple mountains later we arrived at lovely Lake Lowell, where I
stopped for a swim while Alex continued to the campground (only a few
miles away at this point). Although the sun was getting low in the
sky, and the day was cooling off, the water was still warm enough to
relax for a while.

The last miles into camp followed the beautiful West River Trail
through the woods, and as the woods were a bit dim by now I turned on
my lights. But a week of Vermont dirt seemed to have done a number on
the inexpert crimps in my dynamo wiring, and the connection was
intermittent and the lights flickered on and off. Time to get a real
crimping tool, I think.

At Winhall Brook Campground Alex had found us a lean-to site by the
river, and the camp host kindly brought us a load of firewood on a
golf cart.

I strung my hammock between the lean-to and a nearby tree,
and was asleep pretty soon after I finished my ramen.

([day four ride](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/95719225))

## Thursday: Winhall Brook to Williamstown

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 9ba5a9 "Stratton Mountain from below" %}
  <figcaption>Stratton Mountain from below</figcaption>
</figure>

We woke up excited, but nervous. Today, barring any major mechanicals,
we would finish the ride. But the longest climb of the VTXL was still
ahead, about ten miles ahead of us: the singletrack IP (International
Paper) Road up Stratton Mountain.

This would be my third encounter with Stratton. In 2018, attempting to
reach the Grout Pond campground via a Komoot "road" route, I climbed
Stratton on pavement before the route turned into a snowmobile trail
(which would have connected--though I didn't make it that far--to the
IP road). I was on 28mm tires and was not expecting a trail; by the
time the pavement ended, it was dark, raining, and 40 degrees; and as
far as I could tell from my headlamp, the trail seemed to be mostly
under several inches of water. I bailed to a nearby hotel.

Then last year, on the Roundabout Brattleboro, we went over Stratton
on the IP road in the opposite direction. I remembered the descent
being steep, sandy, and loose. Today it would be a climb, and I had
been dreading it for days.

But although long, the grade was not as steep as it had seemed on the
descent, nor was the surface as loose. The singletrack through the
woods was beautiful, with the occasional breathtaking view through a
break in the trees. The climb I'd feared turned out to be my favorite
part of the VTXL.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo bf380643cf58f5db2999306cb757513b1ddda685 "View from the upper IP road" %}
  <figcaption>View from the upper IP road</figcaption>
</figure>

The descent (ten miles long!) was on smooth dirt, gently curving along
the Roaring Branch River. At the bottom I stopped for a swimming hole
while Alex went ahead to the lunch stop at the Chippenhook General
Store. (The river was much colder than yesterday's lake had been, so
it was a quick dip.)

After solid sandwiches, fries, and gelato at the store, we were in the
home stretch. We knocked out more big climb (Mount Anthony, near
Bennington), then passed through Pownal--the last town in
Vermont--then began to climb again toward the Massachusetts
border. (My heart stopped when we ran into two walkers at the bottom
of this last climb who exclaimed, disbelieving: "Are you going to ride
all the way to the top?" But it was a short-ish climb, by VTXL
standards.)

Finally, we reached the border marker (I rode past without noticing,
until Alex called me back). A man living nearby offered us water, and
we took a minute to rest before riding the few miles back to my car in
Williamstown.

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo 678efd "Done! Photo courtesy Alex Estes" %}
  <figcaption>Done! Photo courtesy Alex Estes</figcaption>
</figure>

([day five ride](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/95776937))

## Final Thoughts

I've really enjoyed both of Joe Cruz's routes so far, and I hope to
ride his other northeastern routes (the [Green Mountain Gravel
Growler](https://bikepacking.com/routes/green-mountain-gravel-growler/)
and the [Delaware County dirt
circuit](https://bikepacking.com/routes/delaware-county-catskills-dirt-circuit/))
soon.

Despite the dire warnings of the bike shop folks, I rarely found
myself wishing for a bigger tire than the 38mm knobbies. I did spend
most of the ride wishing for lower gears. My lowest gear was 30-34,
which is the same as the lowest gear in Shimano's GRX group, but this
is really a route for mountain-bike gearing, not gravel gearing.

Aside from one rainy afternoon and evening, we had near-perfect
weather and no mechanicals (not even a flat!) Rides like this keep me
coming back to Vermont every chance I get.
