---
layout: post
title: Sleeping outside in 2025.
---

I spent only 16 nights outside in 2025--far fewer than in past
years. I did more non-camping traveling (Mexico, New Mexico, Toronto,
Morocco, San Francisco), and I was unemployed for most of the first
half of the year (which seems like it would allow for more trips--but
with constant interviewing and a limited budget, it didn't work out
that way).

## 🚲 January 25-26: Ninham Mountain

<figure>
  {% rokka_photo bcfb2f %}
  <figcaption>Josh trying to warm himself up over the morning fire</figcaption>
</figure>

This was a cold one, with lows in the teens. I'd just come back from a
month in Mexico and I worried I wouldn't be sufficiently acclimated to
the winter. But I was plenty warm, despite somehow managing to lose a
single [pogie](https://7rbags.com/pogies-pocket-epx-black/) just
outside Croton Falls. (Josh and I retraced my steps multiple times,
and I came back a week later when the snow had melted to check again,
but it was gone without a trace.) The air was bone-dry and we had a
roaring fire in the snow.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/249928821)<br>
(I didn't record Day 2 for some reason, maybe my phone was dead?)<br>

## 🚲 April 14-15: Lundy Road

{% rokka_photo f448b2 %}

Another trip with Josh over the Shawangunk Ridge (where we pushed our
bikes through the late-season snow we hadn't planned for). We ate
steak at Aroma Thyme in Ellenville and camped up the hill off Lundy
Road. Josh forgot one hammock strap so we used some doubled-up
guy-line and it held through the night. In the morning somebody from
Brooklyn at the Kerhonkson Diner clocked my [Fairlight](https://fairlightcycles.com/) (this part of
the Hudson Valley is full of city people these days).

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/270654962)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/270701599)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span> May 10-11: California Hill

{% rokka_photo 887527 %}

An old-school ADV spot with an old-school ADV crew: Josh, Annie,
Shanit, Jason, and Isaac. Jason and Isaac were both training for some
grueling ultra-endurance thing and took separate (and much harder)
routes to camp. It wasn't quite swimming weather yet, but we hung out
on a rock on Waywayanda Lake and watched the stars come out.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/281302844)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/284999564)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚗</span> May 26-27: Tolland State Forest

{% rokka_photo 7fbe09 %}

Maria and I rented a Zipcar and drove up to meet friends on the second
night of their Memorial Day weekend trip, at a beautiful campsite
overlooking the Otis Reservoir. It was strange to think that the
previous year on the same weekend I'd done a bike trip in Central New
York with many of the same people, recently divorced and feeling very,
very single; I would end up meeting Maria only a few weeks later.

On the second day we had perfect weather, and rented a canoe on the
Mad River in Connecticut.

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span>/<span class="emoji">🚗</span> June 7-8: Taconic State Park for Mimi's and Michelle's Birthdays

{% rokka_photo b8ab7e %}

This was Maria's first bike-camping trip--a (qualified)
success. Jessica lent her a very good bike-camping bike with dynamos,
etc., but the fit wasn't quite right and Maria became less and less
comfortable as the ride progressed. This was not helped by several
factors:

- I forgot to warn her that she would need to eat and drink more than
  normal, and she was bonking hard
- She had gotten minimal sleep the night before because she was
  doomscrolling
  [r/ladycyclists](https://www.reddit.com/r/ladycyclists/) reading all
  kinds of horror stories about saddle sores, mechanicals, and getting
  dropped
- I kept reminding her about seeing bears on the very same rail trail
  we were riding
  
But she was a good sport and we made it to camp just at sunset. It was
a big crowd for the joint birthday party, and a convivial night. In
the morning we hiked to Bash Bish Falls, then borrowed Mimi's car to
head back to the train at Wassaic.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/296419446)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span> July 4-6: Lundy Road and Colgate Lake

{% rokka_photo 4f112f %}

This was classic Catskills summer riding with Josh and Jason: two
nights, two swimming holes, fireworks, and lots of climbing. Maria had
invited me to watch the NYC fireworks from her office in the Empire
State Building, where the view would be spectacular, but I was itching
for a real bike-camping trip, so I reluctantly turned her down.

After we set up camp along Lundy Road on the Fourth, we descended back
into Warwarsing and then rode toward Ellenville until we found
somebody with a well-situated yard with a clear view of the local
fireworks. They were kind enough to let us set up our camp chairs to
watch.

We spent the second night at a very-crowded Colgate Lake. I snagged a
great campsite overlooking the lake--just in time, because soon a
steady stream of would-be campers showed up there looking for the same
spot.

In the morning Jason and I woke early. We packed our things. We made
coffee. I enjoyed a leisurely swim. Josh was still sleeping
soundly. Jason made a couple attempts to wake him up, but nothing
worked. Finally, overcome by hunger, we left without him and descended
to the diner on Route 23A. Josh found us there half an hour or so
later, full of eggs and pancakes. He was none too happy with us.

My fitness was very poor on this trip (my first "real" bike trip in
two months) and I spent most of it off the back, but it was fine
weather and good to be out in the mountains.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/304319677)<br>
[Day 1 (fireworks excursion)](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/304319679)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/304723745)<br>
[Day 3](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/305077568)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span> August 16-17: Emily's Birthday

<figure>
    {% rokka_photo 308eb5 %}
    <figcaption>The word "hostel" is doing a lot of work here.</figcaption>
</figure>

My Fairlight was in the shop for something like two months[^1]. There
is a long and tedious saga here about carbon failure risk, fork-pack
mount design, internal dynamo routing, and SON's proprietary coaxial
wire, but I won't bore you with all of it. The point is I didn't have
a camping-ready bike for most of the prime summer bikepacking months
and it sucked.

But! for her birthday, Emily planned an overnight trip on flat Long
Island, so I could manage without gears. And it was high summer so I
could pack minimally. And so for the first time I went camping on my
fixed-gear bike.

It has no affordances for racks so I strapped a dry bag to the saddle
and overstuffed my handlebar bag and somehow that was enough for a
summer overnight. We ate fancy Hamptons donuts and stopped at Hamptons
wineries and rode past lavender farms and miles-long traffic jams and
took the Shelter Island ferries. We camped by the beach and swam in
questionable water. I didn't pack a stove so in the morning I rode 10
minutes to a coffee shop and rode back to camp one-handed with a latte
in my other hand.

Long Island's charms (as others see them) are lost on me--too many
memories of hours spent in traffic on the LIE going to my
grandparents' houses growing up. But I was very grateful to be able to
go riding and camping with friends on my fixie.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/321036771)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/321342564)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚗</span> August 21-23: Vermont

{% rokka_photo b736e3 %}

Maria wanted to show me her places and I wanted to show her mine, so
we rented a car and drove to Vermont (where I've spent so many weeks
riding and camping) and then to Boston (where she went to school).

The first night in Vermont we camped at the USFS campground at Grout
Pond, where I'd never been. Due to a planning error (mine) we arrived
with no reservations. Every site was reserved; every site had a tag
indicating who had reserved it, and when. One site, though, had been
reserved for an entire week, by someone named Kavanaugh. We were three
days into that reservation, the sun was setting, and there was no sign
of anyone at the campsite. We gambled that the odds were low that the
Kavanaughs would show up after dark on the third night of a six-night
reservation and set up our tent, prepared to swear to any inquisitive
forest ranger that we were Mr. and Mrs. Kavanaugh. But nobody ever
showed and we had a great time lazing around the fire and swimming in
the clear lake.

The second night we camped at the USFS campground at Silver Lake,
where I camped [in 2018](/vermont) on a rainy night in October when I
had the whole place to myself. This time we weren't alone, but it felt
like it. Our site was secluded and spacious, with tall pines and a
path down to the lake. We spent the evening swimming; in the morning,
Maria slept in while I read for hours by the fire.

From Silver Lake we turned south again toward Boston, where we stayed
a few days with her boarding-school roommate and where she showed me
all of her formative places.

## 🚲 August 30-31: Stewart Hollow Brook

<figure>
    {% rokka_photo 616ff9 %}
    <figcaption> Stars over the Housatonic River</figcaption>
</figure>

This trip originated in the group chat for a Morocco bike tour I did
with five others in April. That trip was cut short when Marie suffered
a bad crash, ending up in a hospital in Meknès for over a week. At the
time, none of us were really sure what her recovery would look like.

So it was a relief when, in August, now back in Brooklyn, she posted
on the group chat for the trip to suggest a local overnighter.

We ended up riding to the Stewart Hollow Brook AT shelter outside of
Kent, Connecticut. Marie was fully recovered and even riding the same
bike, which was unscathed in the crash.

In the morning some of us continued on for a second night, while the
rest of us rode back to Dover Plains for a diner breakfast and to
catch the train. But it was so beautiful, and so good to be out on our
bikes, that midway through breakfast we decided to ride another 20
miles to Pawling for the later train.

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span> October 11-12: Macedonia Brook

{% rokka_photo 210552 %}

Maria and I had planned to join by car but she got sick so I packed
the bike and rode with the others. In the first few miles climbing out
of Wassaic, Annie--several months pregnant--fell behind and was
feeling bad about not it, until she realized she had been riding on a
flat tire.

Mimi planned this one so you know we stopped at a winery. Zeno--on the
later train--caught up with us there and rode with us for the next
couple hours--but as the day wore on it grew a bit drizzly and cold,
and he eventually decided to catch the train back instead of camping.

We were glad finally to arrive at our campsite, where Mimi's boyfriend
Mike was waiting for us and where Emily arrived shortly after we did,
having taken a late train. We piled into Mike's car for a ride into
town for a fancy dinner at Kingsley Tavern.

Returning, the hammockers among us set up under cover of darkness
because Mimi had learned from the ranger that hammocks are forbidden
at Connecticut state campgrounds--although, he assured her, a possible
loosening of the rules "already being discussed in Hartford."

In the morning it was a quick ride to Dover Plains for a diner
breakfast and the train.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/342390150)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/342394824)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span> October 18-19: Livingston State Forest

<figure>
    {%rokka_photo 487128 %}
    <figcaption>Sunset over the Hudson</figcaption>
</figure>

I picked this spot, where I'd camped years before in the pouring
rain. It wasn't a great spot then but I thought maybe with good
weather and daylight we'd find a nicer campsite--but we didn't. This
forest is interesting and goes right up to the train tracks along the
Hudson (if you don't mind a lot of scrambling and bushwhacking), but
there is a lot of traffic noise, it's a bit swampy, and (we
learned by the glinting of many eyes lit up by our headlamps after
dark) it is infested with spiders.

I rode with Josh and Jason and Gerard. On the way back I made everyone
stop at the Sheep and Wool Festival, an indescribable event in which
30,000 knitters and other wool enthusiasts flock to the Dutchess
County fairgrounds in the village of Rhinebeck (population 2,700). My
eye was turned by the sheepskins for sale and I contemplated strapping
one to my saddlebag for the rest of the ride, but I lost my
nerve--which I still regret.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/344358288)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/344640039)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚗</span> October 25-26: Hannah's Birthday

Once again, for Maria's goddaughter's birthday, we went camping at
Hickory Run State Park in Pennsylvania. This year, the bathhouse was
closed (unexpectedly for us) and so we had no water source, but we
were still having a great time until Sunday when it was time to leave
and our Zipcar Prius would not start. (I left my phone charging
overnight which must have depleted the car battery--and it only
charged my phone to 28%!)

It turns out that a Prius is very hard to jumpstart. We tried a
friend's jumpstart pack. We tried the park ranger's more powerful
jumpstart pack. We tried a campsite neighbor's jumper cables. We tried
connecting each of these in turn to the jumpstart points under the
hood that Toyota tells you to use, and to the actual starter battery
in the trunk. Nothing worked. We spent hours trying these things, and
more hours waiting for the tow truck that Zipcar lied about sending,
which never came. We had almost no signal at the campground, and the
park office would not let us use their wifi, until Maria
figured out how to join it by impersonating an employee of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and I tried to find an Uber back to the
city. I didn't expect much--this was rural Pennsylvania and the drive
would be several hours. I was astonished when Juan almost immediately
accepted our request, and more astonished when I texted him to make
sure he understood that this would be a five-hour round trip for him
and he was unfazed.

We left the Zipcar in the campground and I still don't know whether
the Zipcar tow truck or the state park tow truck got to it first.

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span> December 6-7: New Forge State Forest

{% rokka_photo d79728 %}

I'm not sure when I last camped alone, but it had been at least two
years. Solo camping is uniquely restorative for me and I should not
have let it go so long.

New Forge is a little off the radar of NYC cyclists (I don't know
anyone else who has camped there) but it's quite lovely, at the end of
a dirt road with a waterfall and a stand of tall pines just off the
parking area. In the summer there is a swimming hole which DEC used to
mark on their maps (now inexplicably removed). But on this trip it was
very cold, with lows in the teens.

The route was light on services, and I stopped only at the store in
Clinton Corners. In fact the store is not so much in as constitutive
of Clinton Corners, where there is little else. My grandfather (who
lived his whole life a few miles away in Pleasant Valley) wrote down a
few recollections of his childhood later in life, and among them was
his account of fearing a killer on the loose after the brutal 1930
[quadruple
murder](https://www.nytimes.com/1930/11/29/archives/killing-of-4-makes-dutchess-mystery-dairyman-wife-daughter-and-son.html)
in Clinton Corners. (Still unsolved!)

I arrived just at dusk, made dinner, drank a beer in my hammock, and
was asleep by 8:30. In the morning I was woken by a hiker passing
by. (It's hard to see where the trails go sometimes when they're under
the snow.)

I'd planned on breakfast (and the chance to warm my toes) at the
Ancram Little Store five miles away, but it was closed, so I rode a
few miles on to Ancramdale where [The Farmer's
Wife](https://www.thefarmerswife.biz/) fed me a delicious breakfast of
local bacon and eggs. The sun was bright all the way to the train at
Wassaic.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/355341912)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/355369485)<br>

## <span class="emoji">🚲</span> December 30-31: Wassaic Multiple Use Area

{% rokka_photo d6da92 %}

I began composing this post sometime in December and in the process I
realized how little camping I'd done this year. I determined to get at
least one more trip in. I planned a route to the upper section of the
Wassaic Multiple Use Area, which I thought looked promising (the lower
section along route 22 was an overgrown disappointment in 2023 when I
camped there at Halloween with Mimi and Herschel). I figured this
would probably be another solo trip, but I put an open invitation to
join and Jake decided to join. (He does multiple ultra-endurance
bikepacking races every year and felt like an overnight would be more
relaxing, even with lows around 20°F.)

The day was cold and windy but the site turned out to be nice,
overlooking the road and the river. At the last gas station before
camp I bought ice cream. Jake thought I was crazy but it was delicious
even in the cold.

[Day 1](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/358879232)<br>
[Day 2](https://ridewithgps.com/trips/358879230)<br>

[^1]: The shop's estimate for the work: one day.
